 The district court concluded that this foreign-cubed case—involving wrongs committed by Hungarians against Hungarians in Hungary—should be litigated in Hungary. In so doing, the court permissibly applied the settled law of forum non conveniens.
Our standard of review is narrow. As the Supreme Court has instructed: "The forum non conveniens determination is committed to the sound discretion of the trial court. It may be reversed only when there has been a clear abuse of discretion; where the court has considered all relevant public and private interest factors, and where its balancing of these factors is reasonable, its decision deserves substantial deference." Piper Aircraft Co. v. Reyno, 454 U.S. 235, 257, 102 S. Ct. 252, 70 L. Ed. 2d 419 (1981). Thus, a reviewing court may not "substitute[ ] its own judgment for that of the District Court." Id.   Under this narrow standard, reversal here is unwarranted.
The district court correctly stated the relevant legal principles. First, it acknowledged "the 'substantial presumption in favor of a plaintiff's choice of forum.'" Simon v. Republic of Hungary (Simon III), 277 F. Supp. 3d 42, 62 (D.D.C. 2017) (quoting Agudas Chasidei Chabad v. Russian Fed'n, 528 F.3d 934, 950, 381 U.S. App. D.C. 316 (D.C. Cir. 2008)). Then, the court correctly stated the governing rule—"a court 'may nonetheless dismiss a suit for forum non conveniens if the defendant shows (1) there is an alternative forum that is both available and adequate and, (2) upon a weighing of public and private interests,' that the alternative forum is 'the strongly preferred location for the litigation.'" Id. (alterations adopted) (quoting MBI Grp., Inc. v. Credit Foncier du Cameroun, 616 F.3d 568, 571, 392 U.S. App. D.C. 387 (D.C. Cir. 2010)). Finally, the court correctly identified nine relevant private-and public-interest factors to be considered. Id.
My colleagues conclude that the district court gave insufficient weight to the plaintiffs' choice of forum, relieved the defendants of their burden of proof, and unreasonably balanced the relevant factors. Respectfully, I disagree.
A
The district court permissibly assessed the weight owed to the plaintiffs' choice of a United States forum. At the outset, the court repeatedly recognized the "substantial presumption" or "substantial deference" generally due to such a choice. 277 F. Supp. 3d at 62, 63. Then, the court reasoned that the degree of deference was "lessened" in this case because only four of the fourteen named plaintiffs are United States residents, because "none of the underlying facts in this case relate to the United States in any way," and because the named plaintiffs and the putative class that they seek to represent come "from all over the globe," whereas the defendants are based entirely in Hungary. Id. at 63.
This analysis is consistent with governing law. As the Supreme Court has explained: "When the home forum has been chosen, it is reasonable to assume that this choice is convenient," but "[w]hen the plaintiff is foreign, ... this assumption is much less reasonable." Piper Aircraft, 454 U.S. at 255-56. And, in either case, the plaintiffs' choice is significant only insofar as it bears on "the central purpose of any forum non conveniens inquiry," namely "to ensure that the trial is convenient." Id. at 256. Thus, the district court was amply justified in considering the residencies of all parties as well as the disconnect between the plaintiffs' chosen forum and the relevant facts—matters that bear directly on the convenience of litigating this case in a United States court.
My colleagues highlight the district court's single usage of the phrase "minimal deference," which they read as a threshold legal error of "set[ting] the scales wrong from the outset." Ante at 11, 17. What the court actually said, after flagging the various considerations noted above, was that "[i]n these circumstances, the plaintiffs' choice of forum is entitled to minimal deference." 277 F. Supp. 3d at 63. In context, the statement reflects not a failure to recognize the presumption, but the court's considered conclusion that the "defendants had overcome the presumption" in this case. Id. at 64 (quoting Moscovits v. Magyar Cukor Rt., 34 F. App'x 24, 26 (2d Cir. 2002)). That was neither legal error nor an abuse of discretion. See, e.g., Iragorri v. United Techs. Corp., 274 F.3d 65, 71 (2d Cir. 2001) (en banc) ("the degree of deference given to a plaintiff's forum choice varies with the circumstances").
  My colleagues object that Hungary made no detailed presentation regarding the plaintiffs' travel options. Ante at 18-19. But the Supreme Court has warned that "[r]equiring extensive investigation would defeat the purpose" of the forum non conveniens motion. Piper Aircraft, 454 U.S. at 258. The defendants were not required to conduct travel surveys to make the commonsense point that less deference is due to the plaintiffs' choice when most plaintiffs would need to travel internationally regardless of the forum. Nor was evidence necessary to establish that all of the defendants are based, and all of the relevant facts arose, in Hungary. On its face, the complaint makes that clear. See J.A. 104-23.
My colleagues also fault the district court for failing to consider whether any litigation delays in Hungary might prevent the plaintiffs from later re-filing in the United States. Ante at 19. But the plaintiffs did not raise this argument either below or in their opening brief, so it is twice forfeited. See, e.g., Am. Wildlands v. Kempthorne, 530 F.3d 991, 1001, 382 U.S. App. D.C. 78 (D.C. Cir. 2008). Nor did the plaintiffs ask the district court, as a fallback remedy, to attach conditions to any dismissal. And in any event, the whole point of forum non conveniens law is to dismiss cases that can more conveniently be adjudicated elsewhere, not to defer adjudications while plaintiffs exhaust claims or remedies in other fora.
B
My colleagues next contend that the district court improperly required the plaintiffs to prove that Hungary was not an available and adequate forum for their claims, rather than requiring the defendants to prove that it was. Ante at 20. But, in laying out the "applicable legal principles" of forum non conveniens, the district court explicitly stated that dismissal is appropriate only if "the defendant shows" that "there is an alternative forum that is both available and adequate." 277 F. Supp. 3d at 62. The court did not improperly shift that burden.
My colleagues note that the district court, in addressing whether Hungary was an adequate alternative forum, rested on its conclusion that pursuing claims in Hungary would not be futile for purposes of exhaustion. In the court's own words, "the finding that the plaintiffs' pursuit of their claims in Hungary would not be futile satisfies the first prong of the test for application of the forum non conveniens doctrine that Hungary is both an available and adequate alternative forum." 277 F. Supp. 3d at 63.
The district court's statement made good sense in the context of its overall analysis. After all, in setting forth the governing principles on futility, the district court exclusively invoked the adequacy standards of forum non conveniens law. See 277 F. Supp. 3d at 57-58. My colleagues correctly note that exhaustion and forum non conveniens law assign the opposite burden of proof on the question of futility or adequacy. Ante at 21-22. But here, both sides presented detailed affidavits regarding Hungarian law and practice, so the burden of production did not matter. Likewise, the district court assessed futility as a matter of law, based on undisputed assertions in both affidavits, so the burden of persuasion did not matter. Nor did the district court even conclude that the competing legal arguments were at or near the point of equipoise. In context, the district court's cross-reference to its analysis of futility was an appropriate shorthand or, at worst, an obviously harmless error.
The court's analysis makes all of this clear. Among other things, the court explained that the Hungarian constitution "requires that parties be treated fairly and   equally in court, prohibits discrimination on the basis of, among other things, race or religion, and creates rights of appeal to various appellate courts." 277 F. Supp. 3d at 58. The court noted that Hungary recognizes and enforces international law and provides damages for the types of property losses alleged here. Id. And it stated that these and other considerations, as set forth by the defendants and their experts, "strongly support the conclusion that Hungary is an adequate alternative forum for the plaintiffs' claims." Id. The court then considered a "variety" of the plaintiffs' competing arguments and concluded that "[n]one is persuasive." Id. at 59-62. Apart from their mistaken argument about a misplaced burden of proof, neither the plaintiffs nor my colleagues challenge any relevant particulars of this analysis.
My colleagues note that the United States declined to take a position on the availability and adequacy of a Hungarian forum. Ante at 22. But the government's failure to address that question hardly suggests that the district court, in assessing the detailed submissions made to it on that very point, committed legal error or otherwise abused its discretion.
C
The district court reasonably balanced the private and public interests involved. On these points, my colleagues do not argue that the district court committed any discrete legal error, but only that the court abused its discretion in weighing the relevant factors.
1
With regard to private interests, the district court reasonably concluded that much of the evidence in this case will involve paper records written in Hungarian and located in Hungary. The court cited declarations noting "the extensive documents in the Hungarian Archives related to property taken from Hungarian nationals during World War II." 277 F. Supp. 3d at 64. The court also cited the plaintiffs' own complaint, which repeatedly references "vital" evidence "kept by the defendants in Hungary." Id. And the court cited declarations attesting that any pertinent documents were likely written in Hungarian, which would require translation into English if this case were heard in the United States. Id. at 64-65.
My colleagues conclude that, "[a]t best, the location-of-relevant-evidence factor is in equipoise," because "some" records are in Hungary, while an "extensive" collection is at the Holocaust Museum in Washington. Ante at 23-24. But the defendants' evidence showed that the Hungarian National Archives "have a substantial amount of documentation" regarding the Hungarian Holocaust, J.A. 184, and the plaintiffs' own legal expert confirmed "an abundance of records of these confiscations in Hungarian archives," J.A. 244. Moreover, while the plaintiffs' expert noted that "[c]opies" of the documents "may be found" at the Holocaust Museum, he did not assert that the museum had somehow managed to compile records as complete or more complete than those of the Hungarian government. J.A. 244-45. Furthermore, the plaintiffs themselves have found no records relevant to their individual cases in the museum, so there is no case-specific reason to discount the defendants' overall submissions on this point. See Simon v. Republic of Hungary, No. 10-cv-1770 (D.D.C.), ECF Doc. 122 at 21 n.12. Finally, the examples addressed by the plaintiffs' expert confirm that the pertinent original records are in paper form and written in Hungarian. See id., ECF Doc. 122-1, Exs. 2-6. The district court reasonably assessed the nature and location of the documentary evidence.
  The court also reasonably found that there would be "many witnesses" in Hungary who could not or would not travel to the United States. 277 F. Supp. 3d at 65. The plaintiffs had "already sought to depose at least one witness located in Hungary who was unable to travel out of the country," id.—an alleged war criminal recently arrested in Budapest, J.A. 79. Given the number and scope of the war crimes alleged in the complaint, and the need for each individual plaintiff to show that any taking of his or her property was done as part of a genocide, see Simon v. Republic of Hungary (Simon II), 812 F.3d 127, 143-46, 421 U.S. App. D.C. 67 (D.C. Cir. 2016), the district court reasonably treated this consideration as significant.
The district court also reasonably considered the appropriateness of a Hungarian forum in the event of further litigation against Rail Cargo Hungaria Zrt. The plaintiffs had sued RCH in this case, but RCH was dismissed for lack of personal jurisdiction in the United States. See 277 F. Supp. 3d at 65. In contrast, RCH might be joined to any future litigation in Hungary, producing one case involving all of the original defendants, rather than parallel lawsuits across two continents.
Finally, the district court noted one important competing consideration—the "emotional burden" to the plaintiffs of returning to Hungary. 277 F. Supp. 3d at 65. The court reasoned: "While acknowledging the profound nature of the emotional weight of bringing this case in Hungary, the Court is hesitant to find that this factor outweighs virtually every other factor weighing in favor of dismissing under forum non conveniens." Id. I can find no abuse of discretion in the court's recognition and balancing of the competing considerations. For where "factors point in different directions, assuming no abuse of discretion in the district court's analysis of the individual factors, it will be the rare case when we can reverse a district court's balancing of the ... factors" as itself an abuse of discretion. Morley v. CIA, 894 F.3d 389, 391, 436 U.S. App. D.C. 447 (D.C. Cir. 2018).
2
With regard to public interests, the district court reasonably concluded that Hungary's interest in resolving this controversy was greater than that of the United States. The Supreme Court has long recognized the "local interest in having localized controversies decided at home." Gulf Oil Corp. v. Gilbert, 330 U.S. 501, 509, 67 S. Ct. 839, 91 L. Ed. 1055 (1947); see, e.g., Piper Aircraft, 454 U.S. at 260; MBI, 616 F.3d at 576. Moreover, this interest is heightened when the claims "arise from events of historical and political significance" to the home forum. Republic of Philippines v. Pimentel, 553 U.S. 851, 866, 128 S. Ct. 2180, 171 L. Ed. 2d 131 (2008). This case is "localized" in Hungary; it involves the taking of Hungarians' property by other Hungarians in Hungary. In addition, claims arising out of the Hungarian Holocaust are plainly a matter of historical and political significance to Hungary.
My colleagues object that neither Pimentel nor the extraterritoriality and personal-jurisdiction decisions stressing the importance of "a foreign sovereign's interest in resolving disputes internally" were forum non conveniens cases. Ante at 27-28. But the repeated acknowledgment of this interest—in many different contexts—only reinforces the district court's conclusion. In any event, Gulf Oil and its forum non conveniens progeny, such as Piper Aircraft and MBI, amply support the district court's judgment.
My colleagues counter that the United States has recognized a "moral imperative" to provide compensation to Holocaust victims.   Ante at 29. True enough, but the government seeks to further that interest by encouraging parties "to resolve matters of Holocaust-era restitution and compensation through dialogue, negotiation, and cooperation," not by sweeping foreign-centered cases into United States courts. U.S. Br. at 10. Moreover, consistent with Gulf Oil and its progeny, the United States reminds us that "a court should give less weight to U.S. interests where the activity at issue occurred in a foreign country and involved harms to foreign nationals." Id. at 16. Likewise, it reminds us that "[a]pplication of the forum non conveniens doctrine can assist in identifying cases in which an alternative foreign forum has a closer connection to the underlying parties and/or dispute." Id. at 26. These considerations strongly support the district court's assessment of the public-interest factors.
Finally, the district court reasonably concluded that choice-of-law considerations favor a Hungarian forum. Of course, Hungarian law is the obvious source of law to govern acts committed by Hungarians against Hungarians in Hungary. My colleagues express concern that Hungarian law may have affirmatively authorized the discrimination and genocide committed during the Holocaust. Ante at 30. But Hungarian law now outlaws both, 277 F. Supp. 3d at 58, and the defendants affirmatively disavow any defense that genocidal expropriations were lawful in the early 1940s, Oral Arg. Tr. at 22-23, 38. In sum, there is no bar to Hungarian law governing the merits of this case, which will involve "garden-variety common-law causes of action such as conversion, unjust enrichment, and restitution." Simon II, 812 F.3d at 141.
* * * *
The district court correctly stated the governing law and reasonably weighed the competing considerations in this case. Because the court did not abuse its discretion by dismissing on forum non conveniens grounds, I would affirm its decision.

 

