 Dr. Sylvia Singletary alleges that Howard University retaliated against her for trying to stop violations of the False Claims Act. To make out that claim, Singletary must plead and ultimately prove that the University, when it fired her, knew that she was trying to stop FCA violations. But the activities that allegedly caused the firing—Singletary's repeated complaints that laboratory animals were housed in overly warm conditions—did not involve allegations of fraud and fell squarely within her job duties as an attending veterinarian. The proposed second amended complaint thus does not support a plausible inference that the University knew Singletary was trying to stop FCA violations. Accordingly, I would affirm the dismissal of this case and denial of leave to amend.
I
The False Claims Act prohibits knowingly presenting to the federal government "a false or fraudulent claim for payment." 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(A). Either the Attorney General, id. § 3730(a), or private individuals, id. § 3730(b), may sue for violations. The FCA also makes it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee "because of lawful acts done by the employee ... in furtherance of an action under [the FCA] or other efforts to stop 1 or more violations of [the FCA]." Id. § 3730(h)(1). This text creates two distinct intent elements: the employee must act to further an FCA action or stop an FCA violation, and the employer must discriminate because the employee is so acting. To form the prohibited retaliatory intent, the employer therefore must know something about the employee's intent—that she was acting to further an FCA action or stop an FCA violation. See United States ex rel. Schweizer v. Océ N.V., 677 F.3d 1228, 1238, 400 U.S. App. D.C. 284 (D.C. Cir. 2012); United States ex rel. Williams v. Martin-Baker Aircraft Co., 389 F.3d 1251, 1260-61, 363 U.S. App. D.C. 419 (D.C. Cir. 2004); United States ex rel. Yesudian v. Howard Univ., 153 F.3d 731, 736, 332 U.S. App. D.C. 56 (D.C. Cir. 1998).
These cases analyzed an earlier version of section 3730(h)(1), which prohibited retaliation only for acts "in furtherance of an action" under the FCA. Construing that provision, we held that an employer cannot possess the necessary retaliatory intent "unless it is aware that the employee is investigating fraud." Schweizer, 677 F.3d at 1238 (quotation marks omitted). Moreover, an employee's "grumbling to the employer about job dissatisfaction or regulatory violations" does not provide the requisite notice. Yesudian, 153 F.3d at 743. Furthermore, "plaintiffs alleging that performance of their normal job responsibilities constitutes protected activity must overcome the presumption that they are merely acting in accordance with their employment obligations to put their employers on notice." Williams, 389 F.3d at 1261 (quotation marks omitted).
Our cases indicate what kind of conduct provides such notice. The employee in Yesudian, acting outside his normal job responsibilities, told superiors that a colleague "had falsified time and attendance records, accepted bribes from vendors, permitted payments to vendors who did not provide services, and taken University property home for personal use." 153 F.3d at 743. The employee in Williams, who we assumed was acting outside his normal job responsibilities as a contract negotiator, told "the government—the opposing negotiating party—to continue challenging the pricing data underlying his employer's contract." 389 F.3d at 1262. The employee in Schweizer, acting outside her normal chain of command, "alleged a variety of specific False Claims Act violations" to superiors in her company. 677 F.3d at  1239-40. In each case, the employee's activity provided clear notice to the employer of a concern about fraud on the government.
At the same time, we approved a line of cases indicating what kind of conduct does not provide an employer with notice of a fraud-related concern. Those cases featured two distinct "problems"—the employee "made no allegations of fraud," or the protected conduct "was part of his job." Yesudian, 153 F.3d at 744; see Williams, 389 F.3d at 1261. For example, the Fifth Circuit affirmed summary judgment against an employee who had complained to superiors about unsubstantiated charges to the government, but "never characterized his concerns as involving illegal, unlawful, or false-claims investigations." Robertson v. Bell Helicopter Textron, Inc., 32 F.3d 948, 952 (5th Cir. 1994). The Ninth Circuit ordered judgment as a matter of law against a special education teacher who complained to superiors about alleged regulatory violations under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. United States ex rel. Hopper v. Anton, 91 F.3d 1261, 1268-70 (9th Cir. 1996). And the Tenth Circuit affirmed the dismissal of a claim by an employee who, as part of her job, reported widespread violations of Medicaid regulations to her superiors. United States ex rel. Ramseyer v. Century Healthcare Corp., 90 F.3d 1514, 1522-23 (10th Cir. 1996).
In 2009, Congress broadened section 3730(h) to prohibit retaliation "because of" conduct "in furtherance of ... efforts to stop" FCA violations. Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009, Pub. L. No. 111-21, § 4(d), 123 Stat. 1617, 1625. That amendment preserved the key words "because of," which require an employer to know that "the employee was engaged in protected activity." See Yesudian, 153 F.3d at 736. As the Tenth Circuit explained, "[o]nce Congress expanded the scope of protected activity, the universe of conduct that a plaintiff could allege to show notice also necessarily expanded." United States ex rel. Reed v. KeyPoint Gov't Sols., 923 F.3d 729, 766 (10th Cir. 2019). Or as we had previously explained, "the kind of knowledge the [employer] must have mirrors the kind of activity in which the plaintiff must be engaged." Yesudian, 153 F.3d at 742. Post-amendment, this means that an employer must know that its employee either tried to further an FCA action or "tried to stop its alleged [FCA] violations." Reed, 923 F.3d at 766.
Other circuits have continued to recognize Yesudian's core insight that employers are unlikely to have the requisite notice if the employee "made no allegations of fraud" or the protected conduct was "part of his job." 153 F.3d at 744. In United States ex rel. Strubbe v. Crawford County Memorial Hospital, 915 F.3d 1158 (8th Cir. 2019), the Eighth Circuit affirmed the dismissal of claims brought by hospital employees who complained that the hospital had violated Medicare payment requirements, but not that the hospital's "behavior was fraudulent or potentially subjected it to FCA liability." Id. at 1168. The court reasoned that the complaints were not sufficiently connected to "fraudulent" activity to support a plausible inference of employer knowledge. Id. This approach still makes good sense, for "efforts to stop" FCA violations, like efforts "in furtherance of" an FCA action, share the same underlying concern about fraud against the government. In Reed, the Tenth Circuit affirmed the dismissal of a retaliation claim after concluding that the alleged protected conduct involved the plaintiff's ordinary job responsibilities. See 923 F.3d at 767-71. This too still makes sense: employers are unlikely to know that ordinary job activities are "efforts to stop" FCA violations, just as they are unlikely to  know that those activities are "in furtherance of" an FCA action.
In sum, the amended version of section 3730(h) requires an employee to prove that her employer was "on notice that she had tried to stop its alleged False Claims Act violations." Reed, 923 F.3d at 766. And an employer is unlikely be on notice when an employee does not raise concerns about fraud or simply does her job. Yesudian, 153 F.3d at 744. On a motion to dismiss, the question is whether the employee has "pleaded facts that plausibly show" such notice. Reed, 923 F.3d at 766; see Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 667-84, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009).
II
Singletary fails to state an FCA retaliation claim under these governing standards. She alleges two categories of protected activity—repeated complaints to superiors that the University was housing laboratory animals in excessively warm conditions, and one external email reporting the death of nearly two dozen laboratory mice. Charitably construing the proposed complaint, I am willing to credit Singletary's allegations regarding her own intent—i.e., that she undertook these activities in part to stop fraud against the government, rather than simply to improve the treatment of animals under her care or to bring the University into compliance with animal-care regulations. But Singletary does not claim to have raised fraud concerns with the University, and her activities fell squarely within her job as an attending veterinarian. The allegations thus do not support a plausible inference that the University knew Singletary was trying to stop FCA violations.
Singletary's alleged complaints within the University addressed four related topics. First, she voiced concerns that "ambient air temperature" was too high for laboratory animals. E.g., Proposed Second Amended Complaint ("Compl.") ¶ 18, J.A. 129. Doing so fell squarely within Singletary's job duty, set forth in the offer letter attached to her proposed complaint, to "promot[e] ... animal care, health and welfare including but not limited to proper animal quarters." J.A. 165. It is hardly surprising that Singletary—a veterinarian—raised this concern, which would not have suggested that she was seeking to stop fraud against the government.
Second, Singletary complained that the University, by not maintaining proper air temperatures, was violating regulations promulgated under the Animal Welfare Act and the Health Research Extension Act. E.g., Compl. ¶¶ 12-13, 18, J.A. 127-29; see 9 C.F.R. § 3.126(a). Again, this fell well within her contractual duty to promote appropriate animal care. Moreover, Singletary alleges that she was an "Attending Veterinarian" as defined in the regulations. Compl. ¶ 16, J.A. 128. That position required Singletary "to ensure the provision of adequate veterinary care and to oversee the adequacy of other aspects of animal care and use," 9 C.F.R. § 2.33(a)(2), in part by providing "appropriate facilities, personnel, equipment, and services," id. § 2.33(b)(1). Singletary's job thus required her to ensure that laboratory animals were housed in permissible temperature ranges. Her pressing the University about "regulatory violations" in this area would hardly have suggested anti-fraud efforts. Yesudian, 153 F.3d at 743.
Third, Singletary protested that the University "was out of compliance with the terms and conditions under which it was receiving grant money from the federal government." E.g., Compl. ¶ 22, J.A. 130-31. But under the terms of her employment contract, Singletary was required to act "as a consultant for grants ... requiring [her] expertise." J.A. 165. The grant  conditions at issue involved satisfying the regulatory requirements regarding ambient air temperature. Singletary's proposed complaint repeatedly equates the two. E.g., Compl. ¶ 18, J.A. 129 ("the ambient air temperature constituted violations of the terms and conditions under which Howard received grant money"); id. ¶ 21, J.A. 130 ("the ambient air temperature deviations from acceptable standards constituted violations of the terms and conditions of Howard's federal grants"). The Health Research Extension Act similarly requires "assurances" that grantees will satisfy animal-care rules promulgated by the National Institutes of Health. 42 U.S.C. § 289d(c)(1). In context, Singletary's concerns about grant compliance equate to her concerns about regulatory compliance. And raising those concerns fell within her duties as a grant consultant and an architect of the University's animal-care compliance programs.
Fourth, Singletary advised superiors that "the problems that Howard was encountering with respect to the ambient air temperature should be reported." Compl. ¶ 22, J.A. 131. This was another facet of her job duties. As the Attending Veterinarian, Singletary was required to serve on the University's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Compl. ¶¶ 15-16, J.A. 128; see 9 C.F.R. § 2.31(b)(3). By law, that Committee was required to report certain violations of the Animal Welfare Act to the University and the Department of Agriculture, 7 U.S.C. § 2143(b)(4)(A), (C), and to report to NIH any violations of its animal-care regulations, 42 U.S.C. § 289d(b)(3)(C). And as a member of the Committee, Singletary herself was required to report any dissenting views. 7 U.S.C. § 2143(b)(4)(A)(iii); 42 U.S.C. § 289d(b)(3)(C). Moreover, these obligations arose under animal-welfare laws, so complaining about "regulatory violations" in this area would not have signaled efforts to prevent fraud against the government. See Yesudian, 153 F.3d at 743.
In sum, Singletary's claim suffers from the same "problems" noted in Yesudian: she never told the University that she was "concerned about possible fraud," and her actions were "part of [her] job." 153 F.3d at 744. Treating animals inhumanely, violating NIH regulations and grant conditions, and failing to report the violations may be improper, but they do not amount to fraud. And complaints on these matters would have indicated only that Singletary was performing her contractual and regulatory duties as an Attending Veterinarian. To be sure, violations of regulations or grant conditions may become violations of the False Claims Act, but only if a grantee makes false or misleading representations to receive money from the government. Universal Health Servs., Inc. v. United States ex rel. Escobar, 136 S. Ct. 1989, 1999-2001, 195 L. Ed. 2d 348 (2016). And no case suggests that complaints about regulatory violations give notice of further, unexpressed anti-fraud concerns. To the contrary, Yesudian and its progeny make clear that "[m]erely grumbling" about "regulatory violations" does not give such notice. 153 F.3d at 743.
My colleagues read the proposed complaint to allege that Singletary urged her superiors "not to submit false annual compliance certifications and to rectify pending false certifications of compliance." Ante at 22. Likewise, they say that Singletary urged the University not to "assert a fictional compliance" with grant conditions. Ante at 26. Such allegations might well establish the requisite notice, but the proposed complaint does not make them. In support of their reading of the proposed complaint, my colleagues note that Singletary urged the University to take "corrective action." Compl. ¶¶ 18-19, 21, J.A. 129-30.  True enough, but the "corrective action" involved lowering air temperatures. It had nothing to do with avoiding or correcting false certifications—a different concern that Singletary never claims to have raised.1  Indeed, far from even hinting that Singletary conveyed any fraud-related concern, the proposed complaint states that "[t]he issue of poor air quality for laboratory animals was the sole source of tension between Dr. Singletary and her superiors." Compl. ¶ 27, J.A. 132. After performing their own independent research into compliance certifications, about which the complaint is silent, my colleagues posit that Singletary's objections "coincided with a reporting period." Ante at 17. Perhaps so, but that bears at most on whether Singletary had the requisite intent to stop FCA violations. The proposed complaint nowhere suggests that Singletary communicated to the University any concerns about false certifications, which is what matters for notice.
My colleagues further reason that Singletary complained not only to her immediate supervisor, Dr. Thomas Obisesan, but also to Dr. Thomas Heinbockel, the chairman of her animal-care committee, and Dr. Mark Johnson, the dean of the medical school. Ante at 24. We have recognized that when an employee "alerts a party outside the usual chain of command, such action may suffice to notify the employer that the employee is engaging in protected activity." Williams, 389 Obisesan in which she informed him of Howard's non-compliance and sought corrective action, Dr. Obisesan did not act on Dr. Singletary's concerns, she made the same complaints to Dr. Heinbockel and Dr. Mark Johnson .... Dr. Singletary told them that Howard was not in compliance with the terms and conditions under which it was receiving grant money from NIH. Dr. Singletary also made her concerns known to these men in IACUC meetings. As with Dr. Obisesan, she requested that corrective action be taken. No corrective action was taken."); id. ¶ 21, J.A. 130 ("As noted above, she told both Dr. Heinbockel and Dr. Johnson that the ambient air temperature deviations from acceptable standards constituted violations of the terms and conditions of Howard's federal grants. She urged corrective action."). F.3d at 1261 (emphasis added); see also Reed, 923 F.3d at 769. But the ultimate question remains one of the employer's notice of protected activity, and we have never held that any action outside the normal chain of command, no matter how unrelated to fraud prevention, puts the employer on notice. To the contrary, we have held that an employee's breaking the chain of command helps prove notice only where the employee's activity itself warns of fraud. See Schweizer, 677 F.3d at 1239-40 (employee "alleged a variety of specific False Claims Act violations"); Williams, 389 F.3d at 1262 (negotiator told "the government—the opposing negotiating party—to continue challenging the pricing data underlying his employer's contract"). Singletary did no such thing. By her own reckoning, she made "the same complaints" to Heinbockel and Johnson that she made to Obisesan. Compl. ¶ 19, J.A. 129. Because those complaints involved animal-treatment issues as opposed to fraud issues, the mere fact that Singletary conveyed them  to higher-ups does not advance her retaliation claim.
The same is true of Singletary's single email to NIH. The body of that email states:
At 10:45 am, April 15, 2014, I found 21 mice dead from heat exhaustion. Room number [redacted] which houses animals on [an individually ventilated cage] lost power over night. In addition, we have been having difficulty with receiving conditioned air in the facility. A more detailed report will be submitted after I have briefed the IACUC and [Dr. Obisesan].
J.A. 102 (cleaned up). My colleagues recognize that this email "did not accuse the University of fraud in terms." Ante at 18. Far from it. The email reported to regulators that mice died when an air conditioner failed, noted an ongoing problem with air conditioning, and promised more details to follow. Nothing in it would have alerted the University that Singletary was seeking to stop fraud against the government. My colleagues disagree with the district court about whether Singletary broke protocol by sending this email herself, rather than urging Obisesan to do so. Ante at 24-25. But because the email had nothing to do with stopping fraud against the government, that dispute is immaterial to the question whether the email provided the University with the requisite notice.
* * * *
Singletary's proposed second amended complaint does not allege facts supporting a plausible inference that the University knew she was engaged in efforts to stop FCA violations. Therefore, I would affirm the dismissal of this case and the denial of her motion to amend as futile.

 

