 My colleagues set aside a half-century-old murder conviction based on a few scraps of misleading testimony that were briefly given and immediately corrected. In so doing, they recast Napue v. Illinois, 360 U.S. 264, 79 S. Ct. 1173, 3 L. Ed. 2d 1217 (1959), which permits relief only if there is a reasonable likelihood that false testimony caused a conviction, into a hairline trigger for setting aside convictions. And they downplay untainted evidence that overwhelmingly establishes the defendant's guilt. For both reasons, I respectfully dissent.
  I 
A
On September 29, 1970, Jesse Mears was strangled to death at age 75. Mears's body was found in the bathroom of a vacant third-floor apartment in a building that he managed. His hands were tied behind his back, and a telephone cord was wrapped tightly around his neck. He had been gagged with a stocking and a wad of toilet paper shoved into his mouth. Dennis Butler, then 19 years old, was arrested the next day and charged with first-degree murder, felony murder, and robbery.
Every court to review the evidence against Butler has described it as "overwhelming." United States v. Butler, 481 F.2d 531, 535, 156 U.S. App. D.C. 356 (D.C. Cir. 1973); United States v. Butler, 278 F. Supp. 3d 461, 483 (D.D.C. 2017). Eyewitnesses placed Butler with Mears around the time of the murder. Matching paint stains were found on their respective clothing. Mears's keys were recovered near Butler's home. And, most damningly, Butler confessed to the murder to two friends, James Hill and Phyllis Robinson, whose testimony recounting the confessions was "comprehensive and believable and, more importantly, supported by overwhelming extrinsic corroboration." Butler, 278 F. Supp. 3d at 474 (cleaned up).
According to Hill and Robinson, Mears intruded on Butler selling drugs to two boys in the bathroom of a vacant apartment. Butler confessed to Hill that he "tied the old man up," gagged him with a stocking, strangled him with a belt (until the belt broke) and then with a telephone cord, "poured some water down his throat to make sure that he was dead," and absconded with his keys. Supplemental Appendix (S.A.) 22-23. Butler confessed to Robinson that "he was choking the man with a belt and the belt broke and then he started choking him with the telephone cord." Id. at 150-51. The crime scene closely corroborated these accounts. The gag inside Mears's mouth was "soggy"—wetter than saliva could explain. Id. at 8. Mears's corpse lacked a belt, keys, or wallet. And in the kitchen, police discovered a half-open cabinet drawer that contained a man's leather belt split into two pieces and left on top of various other items.
Over the course of four days, the prosecution presented live testimony from twenty-one witnesses and stipulated testimony from two more. Hill and Robinson testified at length about Butler's confessions to each of them. Three witnesses placed Butler near the apartment around the time of the murder. Five witnesses—a medical examiner, a detective, two police officers, and one neighbor—described the crime scene. Five witnesses testified about the recovery of Mears's keys, and one testified about leaving wet paint in the vacant apartment three days before the murder. Five expert witnesses testified about the keys, the crime scene, the water poured down Mears's throat, the paint found on the clothes of Mears and Butler, the torn belt, and hair taken from Mears's clothing and from Butler.
FBI Special Agent Myron Scholberg briefly testified for the prosecution, for less than 16 pages of an 800-page trial transcript. Scholberg began by explaining that the belt had been torn rather than cut. Scholberg then explained his microscopic examination of the hair found on Mears's clothing and of hair samples taken from Butler. Scholberg opined that the hair on Mears's clothing "could have come from" Butler, though he affirmatively disclaimed any "positive identification." Appellant's Appendix (A.A.) 84. Scholberg further opined that it was virtually impossible for "the hair of the suspect and the hair of the victim" to be indistinguishable. Id. at 85. On cross-examination, Scholberg acknowledged that he had "no statistics"  about how many people had hair indistinguishable from the hair on Mears's clothing. Id. at 86. On re-cross, in response to a further question from defense counsel about "how many other people have the same microscopic characteristics of their hair follicles as the one that you identified as Mr. Butler's hair from the clothing of Mr. Mears," Scholberg reiterated: "I have no idea whether anyone would have the same microscopic characteristics." Id. at 90.
The defense presented five witnesses to undercut the credibility of Hill and Robinson and to show that neighbors discussed Mears's killing in the hours after the murder. The jury returned a guilty verdict in one day, and the district court sentenced Butler to twenty years to life in prison.
On direct appeal, this Court affirmed the conviction and sentence. We rejected Butler's contention that the district court had abused its discretion in failing to order Hill and Robinson to be tested for drug use. Both were "admitted heroin users," and we recognized that this undercut the credibility of their testimony. 481 F.2d at 534. But, we continued, "[t]he challenged witnesses' testimony, while ambiguous at times, did present a comprehensive and believable narrative. More importantly, that narrative was supported by overwhelming extrinsic corroboration, giving substantial independent assurance of its reliability." Id. at 535.
In 1978, Butler escaped from prison and remained a fugitive until 2006, when he was caught, convicted of escape, and returned to prison.
B
In recent years, concerns arose about the use of hair evidence in criminal trials, which was common before the development of DNA testing. In response, the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, working with the Innocence Project and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, began studying the appropriate uses of such evidence. In 2012, DOJ issued a statement titled "Microscopic Hair Comparison Analysis." A.A. 101. In it, DOJ and the private organizations agreed that some uses of hair evidence are entirely appropriate. Specifically, "[t]he scientific analysis of hair evidence permits a well-trained examiner to offer an opinion that a known individual can either be included or excluded as a possible source of a questioned hair collected at a crime scene." Id. But because "the size of the pool of people who could be included as a possible source of a specific hair is unknown," a statement "that applies probabilities to a particular inclusion of someone as a source of a hair of unknown origin cannot be scientifically supported." Id. The statement identifies three instances in which testimony "exceeds the limits of science": if the examiner states that "evidentiary hair could be associated with a specific individual to the exclusion of all others" (dubbed Error Type 1), assigns "a statistical weight or probability" to such an association (Error Type 2), or cites "the number of samples from different individuals that could not be distinguished from one another as a predictive value to bolster the conclusion that a hair belongs to a specific individual" (Error Type 3). Id.
In 2015, the FBI concluded that Scholberg had committed two of these errors. First, it asserted that nine lines of testimony from the direct examination, in which Scholberg discussed the probability that hair from Butler and Mears would be indistinguishable, reflected Error Type 2. A.A. 73 (citing Trial Tr. 531, lines 8-16, reproduced at A.A. 85). Second, the FBI asserted that three lines of testimony from the re-cross, in which Scholberg disclaimed any knowledge of the probability that hair from different people would have the same microscopic characteristics, reflected Error  Type 1. Id. (citing Trial Tr. 536, lines 9-11, reproduced at A.A. 90). At the same time, the FBI noted that Scholberg repeatedly had included "Limiting Language" in his testimony. Id. The FBI notified the Innocence Project and the NACDL of its conclusions, and those groups noted their agreement. DOJ then notified Butler's counsel and waived in advance any limitations or procedural-default defenses that might otherwise apply to claims for postconviction relief under 28 U.S.C. § 2255. The notice expressly took "no position regarding the materiality of the error in this case." A.A. 68.
Not surprisingly, Butler moved to vacate his conviction under section 2255. He contended that Scholberg's testimony constituted a knowing use of false evidence to convict him, and thus violated due process. The government did not dispute that some of Scholberg's testimony was false or misleading. Nor did it dispute that the government knew, or should have known, that some of the testimony was misleading. But, the government argued, any misleading evidence was not material.
The district court denied relief on that basis. For twelve pages, the court painstakingly reviewed the evidence and arguments presented at Butler's trial. 278 F. Supp. 3d at 463-74. The court concluded that Scholberg's testimony was carefully hedged, id. at 482; that the testimony of Hill and Robinson "remained supported by 'overwhelming extrinsic corroboration'" even without the hair evidence, id. at 483 (quoting Butler, 481 F.2d at 535); and that the government's entire case, "when viewed as a whole, and even without the hair testimony," established Butler's guilt "beyond a reasonable doubt," id. at 484.
II
Under Napue v. Illinois, 360 U.S. 264, 79 S. Ct. 1173, 3 L. Ed. 2d 1217 (1959), the government "may not knowingly use false evidence, including false testimony, to obtain a tainted conviction." Id. at 269. Moreover, "[t]he same result obtains when the State, although not soliciting false evidence, allows it to go uncorrected." Id. But use or allowance of false testimony does not invariably require a new trial. To the contrary, it does so only if the defendant proves materiality—i.e., a "reasonable likelihood that the false testimony could have affected" the verdict. United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97, 103, 96 S. Ct. 2392, 49 L. Ed. 2d 342 (1976); see Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 154, 92 S. Ct. 763, 31 L. Ed. 2d 104 (1972); Napue, 360 U.S. at 271. We have applied this settled materiality requirement in "decades of cases" under Napue. United States v. Ausby, 916 F.3d 1089, 1092, 439 U.S. App. D.C. 448 (D.C. Cir. 2019) (per curiam). And we have stressed that "even if the prosecution either sponsored or failed to correct false testimony, the grant of a new trial is not automatic." United States v. Vega, 826 F.3d 514, 529, 423 U.S. App. D.C. 350 (D.C. Cir. 2016) (per curiam).
Supreme Court precedent makes this clear. The Court has found false testimony to be material in only four cases. Each time, it stressed the critical importance of the testimony to the government's overall case. In Alcorta v. Texas, 355 U.S. 28, 78 S. Ct. 103, 2 L. Ed. 2d 9 (1957) (per curiam), the "only eye witness" to a murder gave perjured testimony that he was not having an affair with the victim, which was "seriously prejudicial" to the defendant's contention that he had killed his wife only in "sudden passion," upon discovering the affair. See id. at 29-32. In Napue, the "principal state witness" falsely denied that the government had "promised him consideration" to testify, and the conviction rested "largely" on his "extremely important" eyewitness account. See 360 U.S. at 265-66. In Miller v. Pate, 386 U.S. 1, 87 S. Ct. 785, 17 L. Ed. 2d 690 (1967), a government chemist  made a "consistent and repeated misrepresentation" that paint on the defendant's shorts was blood, and this formed a "vital component" of the government's case. See id. at 3, 6. In Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 92 S. Ct. 763, 31 L. Ed. 2d 104 (1972), the government's case "depended almost entirely" on one "key witness," who falsely denied that the government had promised not to prosecute him in return for his testimony. See id. at 151, 154-55.
In contrast, the Court has denied relief for false testimony even on critical issues, as long as the remaining evidence is sufficiently strong. In Kaiser v. New York, 394 U.S. 280, 89 S. Ct. 1044, 22 L. Ed. 2d 274 (1969), the prosecution falsely presented two recorded phone conversations as confessions. That misrepresentation struck at the heart of its case, which "rested principally on the content" of the conversations. Id. at 280. Nonetheless, the record as a whole "clearly and beyond any reasonable doubt implicated the defendant," People v. Kaiser, 21 N.Y.2d 86, 233 N.E.2d 818, 821, 286 N.Y.S.2d 801 (N.Y. 1967), and the jury, which "knew the circumstances under which the incriminating statements had been made," could itself evaluate the misrepresentation in context. See 394 U.S. at 281 n.5. Likewise, in Giles v. Maryland, 386 U.S. 66, 87 S. Ct. 793, 17 L. Ed. 2d 737 (1967), five justices rejected two Napue claims for lack of materiality. Giles involved rape convictions resting on testimony from the victim and her date on the night at issue. A plurality would have ordered further consideration of whether the government had knowingly elicited from them false testimony about one of the defendants and about whether the victim had engaged in sexual activity with her date, who was not one of the defendants. See id. at 74-76 (opinion of Brennan, J.). Although the Court remanded on other grounds, a majority held that neither Napue claim was material: the first involved a dispute fully aired out at trial, and the second involved at most an "inconclusive intimation" of the victim's promiscuity, which could "scarcely have sufficed to change the trial's outcome." Id. at 111-12 (Harlan, J., dissenting); see id. at 82-83 (White, J., concurring in the judgment).
This Court too has confirmed that Napue's materiality requirement has bite. So far as I can tell, we have found the requirement satisfied only twice in the six decades since Napue was decided. In United States v. Iverson, 637 F.2d 799, 205 U.S. App. D.C. 253 (D.C. Cir. 1980), we reversed a conviction where the government had failed to correct perjury by a "key witness" who falsely testified that she "had nothing to gain from testifying for the government." Id. at 801.1  And in Ausby, we set aside a conviction resting in part on expert testimony falsely stating that hair from the crime scene could be "positively" identified as the defendant's. 916 F.3d at 1091-92. We described this testimony as "the primary evidence that directly contradicted" the position of the defense, which could "plausibly explain[]" all the government's remaining evidence. Id. at 1095.
Over the same period, we rejected at least six Napue claims for lack of materiality. In four cases, the disputed testimony was insignificant relative to the prosecution's overall case. See United States v. Sitzmann, 893 F.3d 811, 828-29, 436 U.S. App. D.C. 310 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (per curiam) ("single reference during a five-week trial ... was unlikely to have influenced the verdict, especially in light of the abundant evidence at trial"  (cleaned up)); Vega, 826 F.3d at 531 (false testimony was "just gilding the lily"); United States v. Burch, 156 F.3d 1315, 1328-29, 332 U.S. App. D.C. 287 (D.C. Cir. 1998); United States v. Anderson, 509 F.2d 312, 326-27, 165 U.S. App. D.C. 390 & n.110 (D.C. Cir. 1974). In a fifth case, "the [false] testimony was corrected, and [the defendant] failed to demonstrate that the misleading content of the initial testimony could nevertheless have affected the judgment of the jury." United States v. Straker, 800 F.3d 570, 604, 419 U.S. App. D.C. 210 (D.C. Cir. 2015) (per curiam). In a sixth, the false testimony was immaterial because the defense received the critical evidence "in time to make effective use of it." United States v. Paxson, 861 F.2d 730, 737-38, 274 U.S. App. D.C. 71 (D.C. Cir. 1988).
Butler attempts to equate Napue's materiality requirement with the harmless-error rule of Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 87 S. Ct. 824, 17 L. Ed. 2d 705 (1967), under which the government, to preserve a conviction despite constitutional error, must show no "reasonable possibility" that the error influenced the jury. See id. at 23. But "reasonable possibility" is different from "reasonable likelihood," and a burden on the government is different from one on the defendant. We thus decisively rejected Butler's position in Ausby. There, we explained that "the harmless-error standard of Chapman," which applies only after a constitutional violation has been established, is substantively and conceptually different from the materiality requirement of Napue, which is an essential element of establishing a due-process violation in the first place. See 916 F.3d at 1092-94.
For their part, my colleagues embrace Chapman in substance, though not by name. Piecing together scattered dicta from two cases, they morph Napue's materiality requirement into "a veritable hair trigger for setting aside the conviction," ante, at 12 (quoting United States v. Gale, 314 F.3d 1, 4, 354 U.S. App. D.C. 161 (D.C. Cir. 2003)), which is "quite easily satisfied" and would require "a virtual automatic reversal" whenever the government has offered false testimony, id. (quoting United States v. Williams, 233 F.3d 592, 594, 344 U.S. App. D.C. 64 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (citation omitted)). But Gale and Williams cannot bear that weight. Neither case set aside any conviction, on Napue grounds or otherwise. In Gale, this Court rejected a Napue claim because the disputed testimony was not false. See 314 F.3d at 3. We referenced the supposed "hair trigger" only after doing so, and only to make the undisputed point that Napue's materiality requirement is less demanding than the materiality requirement for establishing a due-process violation under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S. Ct. 1194, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1963), based on the government's failure to disclose exculpatory evidence without fault. See 314 F.3d at 4. Williams is even further afield. It involved perjury discovered only after trial. There was no constitutional issue at all, but only the question of whether the "interests of justice" required a new trial under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 33. See 233 F.3d at 593. Finally, and most importantly, the dicta quoted by my colleagues do not fairly describe the six decades of case law applying Napue's materiality requirement with some rigor. We should therefore reject the gloss on Napue suggested by Gale and Williams, just as Ausby rejected prior dicta mistakenly equating Napue to Chapman. See 916 F.3d at 1094.2 
  III
In this case, there is no reasonable likelihood that Scholberg's disputed hair testimony could have affected the verdict. For one thing, even setting aside that testimony, the evidence of Butler's guilt was overwhelming. For another, the two scraps of disputed testimony—covering twelve lines of text during a four-day prosecution—were at worst narrowly misleading and quickly cleared up by various ensuing clarifications. In the context of the government's overall case, the disputed statements were wholly immaterial.
A
As the district court explained, the testimony of Hill and Robinson, who recounted detailed confessions made by Butler on the day of the murder, formed "the linchpin of the government's case." Butler, 278 F. Supp. 3d at 483. On direct review, this Court explained that their testimony "present[ed] a comprehensive and believable narrative" that "was supported by overwhelming extrinsic corroboration, giving substantial independent assurance of its reliability." Butler, 481 F.2d at 535. Likewise, as the district court explained, even "absent the hair evidence, the testimony of these two witnesses remained supported by 'overwhelming extrinsic corroboration.'" Butler, 278 F. Supp. 3d at 483 (quoting Butler, 481 F.2d at 535).
Butler was friends with, and supplied heroin to, Hill and Robinson. When police separately interviewed Hill and Robinson one day after the murder, both gave consistent statements reporting confessions that Butler had made to them within one to three hours of the crime. Hill and Robinson then repeated their accounts as the star witnesses at Butler's trial.
Hill provided the fullest narrative. He testified that he called Butler between 3:00 and 3:30 p.m. on the day of the murder, looking for heroin. Over the telephone, Butler told Hill that he had just left the home of Ellen Johnson—the sister of Butler's girlfriend—where "he had just killed the rent man" for her building. S.A. 22. Johnson lived in the building where Mears's body was found. According to Hill, Butler "told me that the old man caught him selling narcotics to two boys, and the old man knocked it over and came over and flushed it." Id. Hill added that Butler "told me he tied the old man up and put a stocking or something in his mouth, and was choking him with a belt, and the belt broke and he started choking him with a telephone cord." Id. Finally, "he poured some water down his throat to make sure that he was dead." Id. Later, around 4:00 p.m., Butler went to Hill's home and divulged more details, including how he had taken "some keys to the apartment or ... to the man's car." Id. at 23. Butler also revealed that the killing took place in the bathroom of an "[u]pstairs apartment." Id. at 28.
Robinson's testimony reinforced Hill's. She arrived at Hill's house around 4:30 p.m. on the day of the murder, where she found Hill and Butler using heroin. Hill told Robinson that "Dennis just killed a man." S.A. 150. Butler then "cut in" to explain that he "had to do something," and that "he was choking the man with a belt and the belt broke and then he started choking him with the telephone cord." Id. at 150-51. According to Robinson, Hill  added that Butler had killed Mears because "the man caught Dennis selling narcotics in the bathroom to two boys." Id. at 152.
My colleagues note fair grounds for questioning the credibility of Hill and Robinson: both used heroin, both gave conflicting testimony about the extent of their drug use, and Robinson gave the police inconsistent statements about which details of the murder she learned directly from Butler and which she learned indirectly through Hill. Ante, at 13. Nonetheless, both knew and separately reported key details of the murder that they could have learned only from the murderer. Hill and Robinson each knew that the killer had choked Mears with a belt until it broke. Additionally, Hill knew that the killer had poured water down Mears's throat. And, of course, the crime scene itself established beyond any reasonable doubt that they truthfully reported these details.
My colleagues speculate that Hill and Robinson might have learned these details from Ellen Johnson and then manufactured a story to frame Butler. Ante, at 20-21. That is a virtual impossibility. Johnson, a sister of Butler's girlfriend, lived in a second-floor apartment in the building where Mears was killed. She testified that, when another neighbor told her of Mears's death, she went upstairs to the vacant apartment, entered it, "just stood there and looked at [the body] and came back out." S.A. 212. During this brief visit to the crime scene, Johnson noticed that Mears "had something white stuffed in his mouth and a cord around his neck and his hands were tied behind his back." Id. But Johnson did not go into the bathroom, bedroom, or kitchen of the apartment, and she did not "look in anything, in any of the cabinets or any of the tables or anything in the kitchen." Id. at 219-20. Thus, it is highly unlikely that she would have noticed (but failed to mention in her testimony) that the stocking protruding from Mears's mouth was wetter than spit would explain and then would have inferred that the murderer must have poured water down his throat. Likewise, it is virtually impossible that she would have looked in the kitchen drawer (from her position outside the bathroom), noticed the torn belt among other random items, and inferred that it must have been a failed murder weapon used before the telephone cord finished the job. Johnson—who had no motive to shade her testimony adversely to Butler—further testified that she did not convey to Hill the details of what she saw at the crime scene. Id. at 215. My colleagues cite other evidence suggesting that Johnson conveyed those details to her sister Lillian Harring, who in turn conveyed them to Mary Dean (another sister, who was also Butler's girlfriend), who in turn conveyed them to Hill. Id. at 450-52. Even if those various communications occurred in the hours after the murder, Johnson still cannot be the source of Hill's and Robinson's knowledge that the murderer tore a belt trying to strangle Mears, or Hill's knowledge that the murderer then poured water down Mears's throat to make sure that he was dead. The only rational account of this evidence is the obvious one: Butler confessed to Hill and Robinson, just as they testified.
Other evidence linked Butler to the crime. Many eyewitnesses placed him near the building around the time of the murder, and one even saw Butler and Mears working together on a car around 12:30 to 1:00 p.m. In addition, two weeks after the murder, Mears's keys were found on a rooftop three doors down from the home where Butler lived with his girlfriend, almost half a mile away from where Mears was murdered. Furthermore, when Butler was arrested in the early morning of September 30, the day after the murder, his pants had a spot of aqua-colored paint.  Three days before the murder, Wilson Dean, the brother of Butler's girlfriend, was painting the apartment where the murder took place. Dean testified that he left in the apartment a pan of paint, a roller, and an open paint bucket with some cans and soda bottles inside it. When police inspected the crime scene, they found the pan, roller, and bucket. They also found aqua-colored paint stains on Mears's coat and on a Pepsi bottle containing water and lying inside his coat. An expert for the government testified that the paint on Butler's pants, the paint on Mears's coat, and the paint on the Pepsi bottle all were similar or identical "in color, texture, and type of paint." S.A. 342.
My colleagues seek to discount all this corroborating evidence piece by piece. Butler's presence at the apartment building, they say, could have been a coincidence. The keys, they say, could have been taken and thrown away by anyone. And the paint, they say, might have stained Butler's pants days earlier. Ante, at 15-16. True enough, but the individual pieces of evidence are more powerful than my colleagues acknowledge. To reiterate, Butler was seen together with Mears right outside the apartment building, within a few hours of the time of death, and Mears's keys were recovered three doors down from where Butler lived, almost half a mile away from the murder scene. As for the paint, Wilson Dean did testify that Butler "came up" to the vacant apartment as Dean was painting on the Saturday before the murder, though he "didn't stay too long." S.A. 241. But it is far less likely that such a brief visit would cause paint-stained pants than would the murderer's struggle to tie up and gag the victim, grab a soda bottle from an open paint bucket, fill it with water, and pour the water down the victim's throat. Moreover, the paint left in the apartment by Dean must have still been wet on the day of the murder; the expert testified that the paint was "applied while wet" to the clothes of both Mears and Butler, id. at 342, and there is no evidence suggesting that Mears might have been dabbed while Dean painted on the prior Saturday. Furthermore, Dean's testimony is incriminating in another respect. It establishes that Butler, who himself used and sold heroin, would have known that the third-floor apartment was vacant—and thus an ideal spot from which to make the sales. Finally, whatever the probative force of any one piece of evidence considered in isolation, "individual pieces of evidence, insufficient in themselves to prove a point, may in cumulation prove it." Bourjaily v. United States, 483 U.S. 171, 179, 107 S. Ct. 2775, 97 L. Ed. 2d 144 (1987). Here, these various pieces of evidence, together with the confessions reported by Hill and Robinson, make the case against Butler overwhelming.
B
Compared to all this evidence, the disputed hair testimony played only a minor role at trial. Much of Scholberg's testimony was appropriate—and made the case against Butler even stronger. According to the FBI, Scholberg "exceeded the limits of science" in only two asserted overstatements made in twelve lines of testimony. A.A. 67-73. But these fleeting scraps were at worst confusing or ambiguous, and any marginal prejudice that they may have caused was immediately cured by corrective and cautionary statements from the prosecution, from defense counsel, and from Scholberg himself—including in twenty-five lines of testimony that the FBI itself recognized as appropriate "Limiting Language." Id. at 73.
In his direct testimony, Scholberg began by explaining the basics of microscopic hair analysis, through which samples of hair can be classified as similar or dissimilar in some sixteen different respects. After  explaining that the hair taken from Mears's clothing and the hair samples taken from Butler were similar in all those respects, Scholberg offered the measured and appropriate conclusion that the hair from Mears's clothing "could have come from the head of the defendant." A.A. 84. Scholberg then elaborated on why he had hedged his conclusion:
Now, I say could have because hairs do not contain enough identifying characteristics to be positively identified as originating from a certain head of a certain individual to the exclusion of all other individuals in this race group. This is not a positive identification. My testimony is they are the same or alike in all the microscopic characteristics that were available to me.
Id. (emphasis added). Measured against the DOJ guidelines on appropriate and inappropriate uses of hair evidence, this testimony was permissible—indeed, it was exemplary.
The first snippet deemed by the FBI to be false involved eight lines of testimony immediately after this passage, at the end of the direct examination. After Scholberg explained his inability to make a positive identification, the prosecutor asked him "how likely or how unlikely is it for two hairs to be microscopically alike, yet come from different people?" A.A. 85. A direct response could have amounted to Error Type 2, had it offered any "probability" that the hair found on Mears's clothing belonged to Butler. Id. at 101. But Scholberg's answer was nonresponsive. He stated that, in his roughly 10,000 examinations, there were only "four or five times when the hair of the suspect and the hair of the victim was so nearly alike ... that I was unable to come to a conclusion as to where these hairs originated." Id. at 85 (emphases added). This suggested a very low probability that the hair of Mears and Butler would be indistinguishable. But as defense counsel stressed in closing argument, Mears and Butler were different races, their hair looked entirely different, and nobody had argued to the contrary. In other words, far from overstating the likelihood that the hair found on Mears's clothing belonged to Butler, Scholberg's nonresponsive answer tended to rule out that the hair belonged to Mears—a possibility not at issue in the case. In context, any overstatement in Scholberg's direct testimony was immaterial.
In any event, immediately after this garbled exchange, the defense cleared up any confusion and thus cured any prejudice. At the beginning of the cross-examination, defense counsel shifted attention away from the question whether "the hair of the defendant and the hair of the victim" were alike. A.A. 85. Counsel then elicited further testimony stressing Scholberg's limited ability to connect the crime-scene hair to Butler:
Q: But, your testimony is that you cannot say positively that ... the known hair from Mr. Butler is the same as the hair that was taken from the clothes of the decedent, Mr. Mears? You cannot say positively?
A: That these hairs originated from the head of the defendant?
Q: Right.
A: That is correct.
Q: They could have originated from someone else's head as well?
A: If all of the characteristics were the same, yes.
Q: That could be any number of people. You don't have any idea how many people that could be?
A: I have no statistics to illustrate this any further, no.
Id. at 86. This testimony was clear, perfectly appropriate, consistent with DOJ guidelines, and recognized by the FBI as proper "Limiting Language." Id. at 73.
 The second snippet flagged by the FBI is even more obviously immaterial. It involved a small portion of the recross, the entirety of which is this:
Q: The relevant statistical comparison would not be between the victim's hair and the defendant's hair. It would be between the microscopic identification you could make of one hair and the rest of the community that might have the same kind of hair. In other words, we don't know how many other people have the same microscopic characteristics of their hair follicles as the one that you identified as Mr. Butler's hair from the clothing of Mr. Mears, isn't that correct?
A: Yes, that is correct. I have no idea whether anyone would have the same microscopic characteristics.
Q: It could be no one or it could be 200 people.
A: It could be no one or it could be someone. I don't have any basis to ... assign a number to it. That is correct.
A.A. 90. The obvious takeaway points are that (i) the dissimilarity of Butler's hair and Mears's hair is beside the point, and (ii) the probability that the crime-scene hair was Butler's is unknown. None of that is problematic, and the FBI itself designated three lines of this testimony as appropriate "Limiting Language." Id. at 73. Yet the FBI still found Error Type 1—associating crime-scene hair to Butler "to the exclusion of all others"—from the three lines of testimony in which Scholberg indicated agreement with the statement that "we don't know how many other people have the same microscopic characteristics of their hair follicles as the one that you identified as Mr. Butler's hair from the clothing of Mr. Mears." Id. at 71-73, 90 (emphasis added). This makes no sense. Any overstatement, in suggesting that Scholberg had previously identified the crime-scene hair as Butler's, was built into a long, leading question formulated by defense counsel. By casually answering "Yes, that is correct," Scholberg made at worst an invited error, which is hardly grounds for setting aside a conviction. See, e.g., United States v. Ginyard, 215 F.3d 83, 88, 342 U.S. App. D.C. 83 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (per curiam). In any event, the thrust of the exchange was not to suggest that Scholberg had positively identified Butler as the murderer. Precisely the opposite: defense counsel posited that "we don't know how many other people" have hair microscopically indistinguishable from Butler's, and Scholberg repeatedly agreed that he had "no idea." A.A. 90. This disputed testimony is actually helpful to Butler.
In fairness, I should note that the short redirect examination raises two similar concerns, although the FBI did not identify it as containing any false testimony. First, Scholberg briefly repeated the point that he could almost never fail to distinguish the hair of a defendant from that of a victim. For the reasons explained above, that statement is immaterial in this case, even if slightly misleading. Second, the prosecutor asked whether Scholberg was testifying that the crime-scene hair was "only similar" to Butler's. A.A. 89. Scholberg responded: "No, I am not. When you imply that something is similar, you are implying that it is also different in some respects. My report and my testimony is that these hairs are the same. They are alike in all identifiable microscopic characteristics." Id. In isolation, this exchange might misleadingly suggest that Scholberg could positively identify the crime-scene hair as Butler's. But all Scholberg said was that the hairs "are alike in all identifiable microscopic characteristics," and his direct examination explained at length why that did not and could not amount to a positive identification. Moreover, defense counsel immediately cleared up this point in the re-cross, where Scholberg twice acknowledged that he could not positively identify  the crime-scene hairs as belonging to Butler—or even estimate the probability that they belonged to Butler.
Closing argument reveals much the same pattern: the hair evidence played a small role in the government's overall case, and any overstatements were at worst fleeting, marginally misleading, and amply corrected. The government addressed hair evidence in barely more than one page of its 25-page closing. Moreover, its discussion of that evidence was carefully hedged. The government reminded the jury that Scholberg "couldn't say whose hair it was," and it merely asked the jury to "consider" the hair evidence rather than to "find [Butler] guilty on that evidence." S.A. 495-96. In contrast, the government described Hill's and Robinson's knowledge of the torn belt and Hill's knowledge of the water in Mears's throat as "pivotal." Id. at 530. Likewise, the government called the discovery of the keys next to Butler's home "very crucial." Id. at 492. The government did briefly mention the four-in-ten-thousand probability of "two different people" having microscopically indistinguishable hair. Id. at 496. But in Butler's closing argument, after reminding the jury yet again that Scholberg "could not testify that it was Dennis Butler's hair," defense counsel hammered away—at length and with great effectiveness—at the irrelevance of Scholberg's one statement of probability:
Now, ladies and gentlemen there was some testimony regarding the hair and four out of ten thousand. Let's get that straight. The FBI expert testified that out of ten thousand cases that he handled only in four cases was the hair of the decedent and the hair of the suspect alike. That is what he testified to. I want you to remember that. From all of the testimony adduced from the stand there is no question but that the decedent was a white man and Dennis Butler is a black man. There can be no similarity of hair. So he can add ten thousand to five. Keep that in mind. The Government tried to change that testimony around but that is what the record shows.
Id. at 520. My colleagues note that the government, in its closing argument and rebuttal, stressed that the crime-scene hair and Butler's hair were "the same in every microscopic detail" or characteristic. Id. at 495-96, 535; ante, at 9. But this did not highlight false testimony at all. Instead, it reflected the legitimate use of expert testimony that Butler, because his hair matched the crime-scene hair in all microscopically observable respects, could fairly be "included ... as a possible source" of that hair. A.A. 101.
C
This case is unlike any other in which we or the Supreme Court have found false testimony to be material. Scholberg's disputed statements do not amount to perjury by "the only eye witness to the killing." Alcorta, 355 U.S. at 29. Nor do they involve lies about plea deals secretly offered to key fact witnesses. Giglio, 405 U.S. at 151; Napue, 360 U.S. at 265; Iverson, 637 F.2d at 801. And they are nothing like false testimony that paint stains were blood stains. Miller, 386 U.S. at 6. To the contrary, like the disputed testimony in Sitzmann, they involve brief comments made during a lengthy trial and dwarfed by "abundant evidence" of guilt. See 893 F.3d at 829.
Moreover, Napue involved only "uncorrected" false testimony, 360 U.S. at 269, which jurors are "not themselves in a position to evaluate," Kaiser, 394 U.S. at 282 n.5. See Long v. Pfister, 874 F.3d 544, 548 (7th Cir. 2017) (en banc) ("All Napue itself holds is that perjury known to the prosecution must be corrected before the jury retires."). Here, in contrast, any misleading  testimony was quickly corrected, so Butler had to show "that the misleading content of the initial testimony could nonetheless have affected the judgment of the jury." Straker, 800 F.3d at 604. In any case involving corrected testimony, that would be an uphill battle. See, e.g., United States v. Chavez, 894 F.3d 593, 601 (4th Cir. 2018) ("It is difficult to imagine how a conviction could have been 'obtained by the knowing use of perjured testimony' when that testimony was almost immediately corrected by the witness himself."); United States v. Joyner, 201 F.3d 61, 82 (2d Cir. 2000) ("cross-examination and jury instructions regarding witness credibility will normally purge the taint of false testimony"); United States v. Cassino, 467 F.2d 610, 622 (2d Cir. 1972) ("the fact that the jury learned the details of the story precludes a successful [Napue] challenge"). Here it is an impossibility, given the amount of independent incriminating evidence, the fleeting and marginal nature of any misleading statements, and the promptness and thoroughness of the ensuing corrections.
Finally, Butler can take no refuge in Ausby. There, the disputed testimony constituted "the primary evidence that directly contradicted [the] defense theory," which "plausibly explained the remaining evidence" presented by the government. 916 F.3d at 1095. But here, there was a mountain of untainted evidence that the defense could not plausibly explain away. Moreover, the improper testimony in Ausby "played a key role" at trial, as "borne out by the prosecution's emphasis" of the point that the hair evidence amounted to a "positive" identification. Id. Here, in contrast, the prosecution disavowed such an overstatement, and the hair evidence played a much smaller part in the overall case. If Ausby was by its own reckoning a borderline case of materiality, see 916 F.3d at 1094-95, then Butler's case falls far short.3 
* * * *
Because Butler failed to show that the disputed hair evidence in this case was material, we should affirm the district court's judgment declining to set aside his sentence. Firmly but respectfully, I dissent.

 

