, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment: I agree with my colleagues on the bottom line. At the motion-to-dismiss stage of this case, plaintiffs Alex Andrews and Eric  Koszyk plausibly alleged Article III standing to bring a pre-enforcement challenge to the Allow States and Victims to Fight Online Sex Trafficking Act of 2017 (FOSTA), Pub. L. No. 115-164, 132 Stat. 1253 (2018). I also agree with most, but not all of my colleagues' reasoning.
FOSTA's central provision makes it a crime to own, manage, or operate a website "with the intent to promote or facilitate the prostitution of another person." 18 U.S.C. § 2421A(a). To secure standing, and to make FOSTA seem obviously unconstitutional, the plaintiffs advocate a sweeping construction of this provision. Here is their position in a nutshell: the phrase "promote or facilitate" is disjunctive, "facilitate" can mean "make easier," and FOSTA thus prohibits any online speech that makes prostitution easier. According to the plaintiffs, this includes several categories of speech in which they seek to engage—advocating for decriminalization; educating prostitutes about rights and risks; helping prostitutes obtain housing, medical attention, child care, or other essential services; and even internet archiving that incidentally sweeps up content related to prostitution. My colleagues neither adopt this construction of FOSTA nor follow it to its logical conclusion that all five plaintiffs have standing. But they do identify this construction as at least one possible reading of FOSTA. Ante at 13-14.
I would reject the plaintiffs' proposed construction, which ignores or overreads all the key statutory terms. To begin, FOSTA focuses not on prostitution as an abstract legal or policy matter, but on "the prostitution of another person"—a widely criminalized act involving the exchange of sex for money, see, e.g., Prostitution, BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY (10th ed. 2014). Moreover, in the criminal law, to "promote" prostitution means to pander or pimp—another common offense that involves recruiting a prostitute or soliciting prospective customers. See, e.g., Pandering, Black's Law Dictionary, supra ("The act or offense of recruiting a prostitute, finding a place of business for a prostitute, or soliciting customers for a prostitute.—Also termed promotingprostitution."). Likewise, in criminal statutes, "facilitate" need not mean "make easier." Abuelhawa v. United States, 556 U.S. 816, 819, 129 S. Ct. 2102, 173 L. Ed. 2d 982 (2009). To the contrary, as a synonym for "terms like 'aid,' 'abet,' and 'assist,'" it presumptively follows, and is limited by, the background law of aiding and abetting. Id. at 821. FOSTA's requirement of action with an "intent to promote or facilitate" prostitution confirms this presumption, by tracking almost verbatim the canonical formulation for the offense of aiding and abetting. See, e.g., Rosemond v. UnitedStates, 572 U.S. 65, 74, 134 S. Ct. 1240, 188 L. Ed. 2d 248 (2014) (to give assistance "with the intent thereby to promote or facilitate commission of the crime" (quotation marks omitted)); 2 W. LaFave, Substantive Crim. L. § 13.2 (3d ed. 2018) (same). This is not to suggest that FOSTA requires proof of a specific, completed act of prostitution, as would the offense of aiding and abetting prostitution. But FOSTA does require that the defendant own, manage, or operate a website with the specific intent to pander or otherwise abet the exchange of sex for money—not simply to advocate for, educate, or provide general assistance to persons who prostitute.
Properly construed, FOSTA does not arguably cover the advocacy, education, assistance, or archiving done by plaintiffs Woodhull Freedom Foundation, Human Rights Watch, and Internet Archive. Nor does it arguably cover Andrews's website insofar as it provides information about "support and rescue" organizations that either discourage prostitution altogether or seek to mitigate its harmfulness. Ante at 9.  But as my colleagues explain, the website also provides prostitutes with information about "online payment processors like PayPal," id., which directly assists the exchange of sex for money, id. at 14. In context, such postings might support an inference that Andrews has the requisite intent to "promote or facilitate the prostitution" of someone besides herself. Because Andrews thus arguably engages in activities proscribed by FOSTA, I agree with my colleagues that she has standing to challenge it.
Finally, I agree with my colleagues' analysis of why Koszyk has standing, so I join Parts I, II, and III.B of the majority opinion, and I respectfully concur in the judgment.

 

