
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 9:12 PM Z
Hanlon v. Purdue Pharma, L.P. (In re Nat'l Prescription Opiate Litig.)
United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
November 18, 2019, Filed
No. 19-3398

Reporter
2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 34350 *
 In re: NATIONAL PRESCRIPTION OPIATE LITIGATION;AMANDA HANLON, et al., Plaintiffs-Appellants, v. PURDUE PHARMA L.P., et al., Defendants-Appellees.  
Subsequent History: Rehearing denied by, En banc Hanlon v. Purdue Pharma L.P. (In re Nat'l Prescription Opiate Litig.), 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 38537 (6th Cir., Dec. 26, 2019)  
Prior History: In re Nat'l Prescription Opiate Litig., 290 F. Supp. 3d 1375, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200501 (J.P.M.L., Dec. 5, 2017)  
Counsel:  [*1] For Amanda Hanlon, Amy Gardner, Plaintiff - Appellants: Celeste Brustowicz, Cooper Law Firm, New Orleans, LA; Scott R. Bickford, Martzell, Bickford & Centola, New Orleans, LA. 
For Purdue Pharma L.P., Purdue Pharma, Inc., Defendant - Appellees: Mark S. Cheffo, Dechert, New York, NY. 
For Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc., Watson Laboratories, Inc., Actavis Llc, Actavis Pharma, Inc., Cephalon Inc., Defendant - Appellees: Michael L. Cioffi, Nathaniel R. Jones, Sarah Alford Wilson, John R. Wirthlin, Blank Rome, Cincinnati, OH. 
For Allergan, Plc, fka: Actavis, PLC, Watson Pharmaceuticals, Inc., nka: Actavis, Inc., Defendant - Appellees: Sarah Alford Wilson, John R. Wirthlin, Blank Rome, Cincinnati, OH. 
For Purdue Frederick Company, Inc., Defendant - Appellee: Mark S. Cheffo, Dechert, New York, NY.  
Judges: Before: GILMAN, GIBBONS, and THAPAR, Circuit Judges. THAPAR, J., dissenting.  
Opinion




 ORDER
Plaintiffs Amanda Hanlon and Amy Gardner appeal an order denying their motion for authorization to move for a preliminary injunction in this multidistrict litigation ("MDL") challenging the actions of prescription opiate manufacturers and distributors. The clerk ordered Hanlon and Gardner to show cause why their interlocutory [*2]  appeal should not be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. In response, Hanlon and Gardner contend that, because the district court's order has the practical effect of denying a preliminary injunction and will result in irreparable harm to unborn babies, 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1) and Carson v. American Brands, Inc., 450 U.S. 79, 101 S. Ct. 993, 67 L. Ed. 2d 59 (1981), vest this court with jurisdiction over their appeal. Alternatively, Hanlon and Gardner ask us to construe their appeal as a petition for a writ of mandamus. Defendants reply, arguing that the district court's order is not injunctive in nature because it does not address the substance of Hanlon and Gardner's claims and does not threaten "serious" or "irreparable" consequences. Hanlon and Gardner move for leave to further respond and tender their response.
Generally, our jurisdiction is limited to appeals from "final decisions of the district courts." 28 U.S.C. § 1291. A party may, however, appeal "[i]nterlocutory orders of the district courts . . . granting, continuing, modifying, refusing or dissolving injunctions." Id. § 1292(a)(1). This exception includes orders that have the "practical effect" of denying an injunction if the order also threatens "serious, perhaps irreparable, consequence[s]" and can be "effectually challenged" only by immediate appeal. [*3]  Carson, 450 U.S. at 84 (quoting Balt. Contractors, Inc. v. Bodinger, 348 U.S. 176, 181, 75 S. Ct. 249, 99 L. Ed. 233 (1955)). In determining whether an order has the threshold "practical effect" of denying an injunction, we focus on the nature and substance of the order, not its label. Cooey v. Strickland, 588 F.3d 921, 922 (6th Cir. 2009). Nevertheless, we approach § 1292(a)(1) "somewhat gingerly lest a floodgate be opened that brings into the exception many pretrial orders." Switz. Cheese Ass'n v. E. Horne's Mkt., Inc., 385 U.S. 23, 24, 87 S. Ct. 193, 17 L. Ed. 2d 23 (1966).
Here, the practical effect of the district court's order was not to refuse Hanlon and Gardner a preliminary injunction but rather to defer consideration of its merits. The district court declined to entertain Hanlon and Gardner's request for preliminary injunctive relief "at this time," No. 19-op-45206, DE 8, Order Den. Leave, Page ID 1448, referring back to an earlier case-management order that placed a temporary "moratorium" on all substantive filings, No. 17-md-02804, DE 4, Scheduling Order, Page ID 27. As the Supreme Court has made clear, however, an order that merely "postpone[s]" consideration of a party's request for injunctive relief is not the same as one that "foreclose[s]" future consideration of its merits, Carson, 450 U.S. at 87 n.12, or itself "touch[es] on the merits," Switz. Cheese Ass'n, 385 U.S. at 25. The order in this case concerns only the timing of Hanlon and Gardner's request for preliminary relief and neither addresses its [*4]  merits nor precludes later consideration of the same. See Gulfstream Aerospace Corp. v. Mayacamas Corp., 485 U.S. 271, 279, 108 S. Ct. 1133, 99 L. Ed. 2d 296 (1988). There is no reason to believe that the merits of Hanlon and Gardner's request will not be considered in due course.
The district court's order is also unlikely to cause Hanlon and Gardner irreparable harm. To be sure, the alleged physical, psychological, and financial harms flowing from prenatal opioid exposure are irreparable. See, e.g., No. 19-op-45206, DE 1, Compl., Page ID 1, 9-12. Hanlon and Gardner, however, do not allege that they themselves—as opposed to members of the putative class—are likely to suffer those harms. Although the complaint states that both are "capable of becoming pregnant," Hanlon and Gardner do not allege that they are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are currently taking opioids. Id. at 3-4. Such speculative harm falls short of the requisite "serious, perhaps irreparable, consequences" of denying Hanlon and Gardner "prompt[]" relief. See Gillis v. U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 759 F.2d 565, 567-68 (6th Cir. 1985) (first quoting Carson, 450 U.S. at 84, and then quoting 16 Charles A. Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 3924 (3d ed. 1977)).
At base, it seems that Hanlon and Gardner's interlocutory appeal is an attempt to circumvent the district court's case-management order. A panel [*5]  of this court already upheld the same case-management order and, although that appeal arose in a different procedural posture and involved different facts, the panel's order was animated by similar concerns about the district court's ability to manage "the conduct [and] progress of litigation." City of Jacksonville v. Purdue Pharma L.P. (In re National Prescription Opiate Litigation), No. 18-4054, 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 4460 at *5 (6th Cir. Feb. 13, 2019) (quoting Gulfstream Aerospace Corp., 485 U.S. at 279). To that end, at least in the MDL context, allowing appeal from a denial of leave to move for a preliminary injunction would undermine the "congressional policy against piecemeal appeals" and hamstring a district court's ability to manage such litigation. Switz. Cheese Ass'n, 385 U.S. at 25.
Hanlon and Gardner alternatively ask that we construe their interlocutory appeal as a petition for a writ of mandamus. Although we have the authority to do so, we will exercise that authority only "if there is a harm that could not be remedied on appeal after final judgment." Howe v. City of Akron, 557 F. App'x 402, 405 (6th Cir. 2014). As discussed above, Hanlon and Gardner are currently unable to demonstrate that they would suffer irreparable harm absent immediate judicial intervention, and their motion for a preliminary injunction will be considered upon the district court's lifting [*6]  of its moratorium. Hanlon and Gardner will have a meaningful opportunity for appellate review once the district court reaches the merits of their request. Accordingly, mandamus relief would be inappropriate at this time.
The motion for leave to file further response to the show-cause order is granted and the appeal is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.
Dissent by: THAPAR  
Dissent




THAPAR, J., dissenting.
The district court issued an order refusing to consider the plaintiffs' motion for a preliminary injunction. Because the order had the practical effect of refusing the injunction itself, this court has appellate jurisdiction. I respectfully dissent from the court's contrary conclusion.
The plaintiffs allege a "serious, perhaps irreparable, consequence" from the lack of an injunction: the lifelong effects of opioid exposure on unborn children. Carson v. Am. Brands, Inc., 450 U.S. 79, 84, 101 S. Ct. 993, 67 L. Ed. 2d 59 (1981) (cleaned up). And the failure to grant their injunction now isn't effectively reviewable in the future—neither when the district court agrees to consider the motion (whenever that may be) nor during a later appeal. Id. After all, by that point, some number of unborn children will have been exposed to what the plaintiffs allege are unsafe levels of prescription opioids. [*7]  No court will be able to rewind the clock and undo their injuries.
The court's order makes two missteps. First, it blends the threshold inquiry of appellate jurisdiction with other issues that belong downstream of that threshold inquiry. True, the plaintiffs haven't alleged harm to themselves. Also true, the harms they allege may be "speculative" or "unlikely." But those points go either to the merits of the proposed injunction or to the plaintiffs' standing. They don't go to this court's power to hear an appeal. What matters for appellate jurisdiction is simply whether the plaintiffs have alleged an irreparable consequence, not whether they actually merit relief. See id. at 85, 89. And if we lack appellate jurisdiction, then the plaintiffs' standing isn't before us either.
The court's second misstep is overlooking the time-sensitive nature of preliminary relief. Since the whole point of a preliminary injunction is its immediacy, "not now, but maybe later" is just another way of saying "no." Gillis v. U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 759 F.2d 565, 568 (6th Cir. 1985); see also Carson, 450 U.S. at 88-89 (noting that the timing of relief matters). Consider what happened here. The plaintiffs believe that certain ongoing medical practices are negligent and will cause serious harms. They tried to move [*8]  for a preliminary injunction to restrain those practices. The district court could have granted leave, taken the motion under consideration for an appropriate time, and ultimately disposed of the motion in a short, simple order. Instead, it issued an order telling the plaintiffs they weren't even allowed to file their motion until further notice. [R. 8, Pg. ID 1448.] With that order, the court made clear that it would do nothing to change the status quo for the indefinite future. If that's not the practical equivalent of a denial, what is?
This court sees it differently, viewing the order on appeal as an adjunct to a "case management order." But as the court acknowledges, what matters here is substance, not labels. Abbott v. Perez, 138 S. Ct. 2305, 2320, 201 L. Ed. 2d 714 (2018). There's no rule of law that puts all case-management orders in one bucket and all appealable orders in another bucket. And there's no reason an order under a case-management plan can't have the practical, as-applied effect of refusing an injunction. When a court's case-management plan includes ignoring emergency requests for preliminary relief, that's when the Carson doctrine comes into play.
That doesn't mean parties can always appeal when a district court fails to dispense [*9]  relief on demand. No one is entitled to the impossible and that includes instantaneous rulings. The demands of briefing, research, and deliberation mean that even the speediest district court takes some time to decide a motion. So defining a reasonable time is a matter of degree.
Still, a district court can sit on a motion for too long. And when that happens, the remedy can't be an appeal, because there's no appealable order. See 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(2). Instead, the remedy for unreasonable delay is a mandamus petition to compel a ruling. See, e.g., In re Hijazi, 589 F.3d 401, 409 (7th Cir. 2009). That's no easy road, since it requires showing a clear abuse of discretion. In re Univ. of Mich., 936 F.3d 460, 466 (6th Cir. 2019). And as the court's order rightly emphasizes, district courts have wide discretion when it comes to managing their dockets.
Some district-court actions may blur the line between the denial of an injunction (which is appealable) and delay in deciding a request for an injunction (which isn't appealable but can be challenged through mandamus). But one simple question will usually do the trick: Is the request for injunctive relief still pending before the court? If the answer is yes, it hasn't been denied. But if the answer is no because of a district-court order, that order is almost always [*10]  appealable.
That lens makes this an easy case. The district court issued an order that fully disposed of the plaintiffs' motion (though not on the merits). The order didn't leave the motion to hang in the air; it threw it out of court. The plaintiffs then appealed from that order. Whether their appeal has any merit is downriver of this court's power to hear it. Because the district court's order effectively refused a request for an injunction, I would hold that we have appellate jurisdiction and allow the case to proceed to merits briefing. Thus, I respectfully dissent from the court's order dismissing this appeal.

 

End of Document
