 with opinion.
WALLACE, J., Dissents with opinion.  
Concur by: CANADY  
Concur




CANADY, Judge, Concurring with opinion.
I fully concur in the conclusion that the appellees failed to make the required showing of due diligence and that it was a gross abuse of discretion for the trial court to set aside the default final judgment. I write separately for two purposes: (a) to address the dissent's contention that the phone conversation between counsel for the plaintiff and Michael Johnson demonstrates due diligence; and (b) to express the view that the appellees have not demonstrated excusable neglect.
The dissent contends that Cinkat Transportation, Inc. v. Maryland Casualty Co., 596 So. 2d 746 (Fla. 3d DCA 1992), Atlantic Asphalt & Equipment Co. v. Mairena, 578 So. 2d 292 (Fla. 3d DCA 1991), and Apolaro, 566 So. 2d 815, establish the principle that "prompt informal notice to plaintiff's counsel of the defendant's intention to seek relief from the default justifies enlarging the period of time for allowing the defendant to file the motion to set aside the default." The dissent further expresses the view that this principle "is dispositive of this case." The dissent's attempt to apply the holdings in Cinkat Transportation, Atlantic Asphalt, and Apolaro is unwarranted.
An examination of these cases reveals that the determination that the defendant acted with due diligence was based in each case on more than the mere giving of "informal notice" to plaintiff's counsel. In each case, the communication between the defendant's counsel and plaintiff's counsel was accompanied by some circumstance-beyond the mere occurrence of communication by the defendant concerning the default-which provided some explanation for the defendant's delay in moving to set aside the default judgment or the underlying default. In Cinkat Transportation, 596 So. 2d at 747, "the delay in filing the motion to vacate was caused by an unfortunate series of miscommunications between [the defendant] and its counsel." In Atlantic Asphalt, 578 So. 2d at 293, the defendant's attorney "testified that based upon [his] conversation [with the plaintiff's attorney] he believed that he had been given an extension to file the motion to vacate." In Apolaro, 566 So. 2d at 817, "there was at best a misunderstanding" arising from the telephone conversation between counsel for the defendant and counsel for the plaintiff "which delayed the actual filing of the motion which plaintiffs knew would be forthcoming." 
In the instant case, the record contains no evidence of a belief that an extension had been granted or of any misunderstanding or any miscommunications. At most, the conversation with plaintiff's counsel involved an acknowledgment that defaults are liberally set aside. The conversation itself did nothing to initiate action on behalf of the appellees to deal with the defense of the litigation against them. And there is nothing in the facts concerning the conversation that provides any justification or explanation for the appellees' continuing failure to respond to that litigation.
The dissent acknowledges that the motion to vacate the default judgment "offered no explanation for the delay" in the filing of that motion. The dissent speculates, however, that "[t]here may have been a good reason for a delay in filing the motion." (Emphasis added.) Such speculation is wholly insufficient to support the conclusion that the appellees exercised due diligence. The appellees had the burden of demonstrating that they acted with due diligence in filing the motion to vacate the default judgment. They presented nothing  to the trial court that provided any explanation for the extended delay in moving to vacate the judgment.
In evaluating the due diligence issue, in addition to considering the seven-week delay after entry of the default final judgment, it is also appropriate to consider the delay from the time the appellees were first put on notice that the suit was in fact not being defended. From the time of the service of the plaintiff's motion for default on June 27, 2003, the appellees were put on notice that something was seriously amiss in the defense of the suit against them. Despite this notice, the appellees did nothing to respond to the litigation until September 25, 2003. This nearly three-month delay is totally unexplained. And it is wholly inconsistent with the conclusion that the appellees acted with due diligence. Since the appellees failed to present any basis to support the conclusion that they acted with due diligence, it was a gross abuse of discretion to grant their motion. See Paleias v. Wang, 632 So. 2d 1132, 1134 (Fla. 4th DCA 1994) ("[I]t cannot be said that the defendant acted with due diligence in moving to set aside the default where 100 days had elapsed after receipt of the unilateral pretrial stipulation indicating a default had been entered, with no reason offered for the delay."). 
In connection with the due diligence issue, I disagree with the dissent's criticism of the reference to a twenty-day period-equivalent to the period allowed for the service of an answer to a complaint-as "a starting point" for analyzing whether due diligence was exercised. The import of that reference is that (a) the filing of a motion to vacate within twenty days of entry of a default judgment will ordinarily indicate due diligence in seeking to set aside the judgment, and (b) when a motion to vacate is not filed within the twenty-day period further inquiry must be made to determine whether there was a justifiable reason for the delay beyond the twenty-day period. Consideration of the twenty-day benchmark is not "an inappropriate substitute for the reasoned consideration of the facts in individual cases." On the contrary, it is merely a factor that can be utilized in carrying out the reasoned consideration of all the relevant circumstances of an individual case.
Finally, I conclude that the appellees not only failed to demonstrate that they acted with due diligence but also failed to establish excusable neglect. The appellees' inaction after receipt of notice that the suit against them was not being defended shows not only a lack of due diligence but also a lack of excusable neglect. In the circumstances presented here, the appellees' reliance on their insurer to defend the lawsuit was inadequate to show the requisite excusable neglect. Reasonable reliance on an insurer to handle the defense of a suit will be sufficient to establish excusable neglect. But a defendant cannot reasonably continue to rely on the insurer in the face of notice that the insurer is not providing the defense. After the appellees were given notice of the plaintiff's motion for default on June 27, 2003, their further reliance on the provision of a defense by the insurer was unreasonable. What may have begun as reasonable neglect was transformed into inexcusable neglect. See Paleias, 632 So. 2d at 1134 (holding that "defendant . . . failed to demonstrate excusable neglect" where "[t]here was no showing that defendant's reliance on her insurer was justified, especially in view of the continuing notice she received, through subsequent pleadings sent directly to her, prior to the trial on damages and entry of a default judgment").   
