.
Because I conclude that the appellees have failed to show that the ballot summary for Revision 8 is clearly and conclusively defective, I dissent from the majority's decision to strike this proposal from the ballot. The majority goes astray by invalidating the proposal on the basis of supposed deficiencies in the text of the proposed amendment itself. Under the standards required by our decisions, the ballot summary here correctly identifies the chief purpose of the proposed amendment. And the summary in no way either affirmatively misleads or misleads by omission. The people of Florida should have the opportunity to vote on this proposal to amend the Constitution.
The challenged portion of the ballot summary, which the majority declares to be defective, relates to a proposed change in article IX, section 4(b) regarding the scope of the duty (and concomitant authority) of school boards to "operate, control, and supervise" free public schools. This constitutional provision currently provides that each school board "shall operate, control and supervise all free public schools within the school district." The proposed amendment limits the scope of this provision to schools "established by the district school board." So under the proposed amendment, each "school board shall operate, control, and supervise all free public schools established by the district school board within the school district." (Emphasis added.)
From this proposed change in the text of article IX, section 4(b), five unmistakable and interrelated points emerge. (1) Under the proposed amendment, constitutional room will exist not only for school-board-established schools but also for a category of free public schools that are not "established by the district school board." (2) The existing constitutional duty of school boards to "operate, control and supervise" all free public schools will be curtailed by the proposed amendment. (3) Under the proposed amendment, school boards will have the constitutional duty (and concomitant authority) to "operate, control, and supervise" the schools they establish. (4) School boards will not, however, have any such constitutional duty (and authority) regarding schools they do not establish. (5) Understood in the context of the "paramount duty of the state" regarding public education established in article IX, section 1, the "operat[ion], control, and supervis[ion]" of public schools not established by a school board will necessarily be under the purview of the state. Anyone who understands these five points will necessarily understand the chief purpose of this proposed amendment and will not be misled concerning its effect. And anyone who reads the text of the summary will readily be led to an understanding of each basic point.
The summary contains three basic elements regarding this proposed change in the Constitution. These three elements in  combination elegantly explain what the amendment does. In the first element, the summary discloses the crucial fact regarding the existing constitutional provision: "Currently, district school boards have a constitutional duty to operate, control, and supervise all public schools." This disclosure of the constitutional status quo provides the necessary basis for understanding the effect of the proposed amendment in curtailing the scope of school board duties. The second and third elements are contained in a single sentence that sets up a contrast: "The amendment maintains a school board's duties to public schools it establishes, but permits the state to operate, control, and supervise public schools not established by the school board." (Emphasis added.) Thus, the second element of the summary points out that the proposed amendment "maintains a school board's duties to public schools it establishes." (Emphasis added.) Third, the summary—having identified the scope of the duties of school boards that are maintained—specifies what the proposal changes by stating that the amendment "permits the state to operate, control, and supervise public schools not established by the school board."
The five points that emerge from the text of the amendment are all made evident by these disclosures contained in the summary. The summary brings home the distinction made in the text of the amendment between school-board-established schools and non-school-board-established schools. In doing so, the summary makes clear both that the duty of school boards to "operate, control, and supervise" currently extends to all public schools and that the duty of school boards will be curtailed by the proposed amendment. Explaining the effect of the amendment, the summary identifies the category of school-board-established schools as falling within the scope of the school board's duty to "operate, control, and supervise." It similarly identifies the category of non-school-board-established schools as falling outside the scope of the school board duty to "operate, control, and supervise." And it recognizes the authority of the State regarding the operation, control, and supervision of public schools not established by a school board that necessarily follows from the elimination of the school board duty to "operate, control, and supervise" such schools.
The majority does not—because it cannot—effectively dispute any of this. Instead, it attempts to change the subject. Rather than focusing on whether the text of the summary accurately discloses the substance of the proposed amendment, the majority—staying on the path blazed by the trial court—assails the text of the proposed amendment itself. The majority jumps to the conclusion that the summary is misleading because certain questions about how the amendment would be implemented are left open by the text of the amendment and therefore not addressed in the summary. The majority's opinion thus repeatedly reveals that the summary is condemned not because it is misleading, but because of what the majority views as deficiencies in the proposed constitutional amendment itself. This is a clear departure from the fundamental principle of our jurisprudence that in determining the adequacy of a ballot summary, we do not review the merits of the proposed constitutional amendment. Fla. Dep't of State v. Slough, 992 So. 2d 142, 147 (Fla. 2008).
The majority cites the trial court's conclusion that "both the text and the summary are entirely unclear as to which schools will be affected by the revision." Majority op. at 4 (emphasis added). The majority also repeats the trial court's criticism that the ballot summary fails to "inform the voter of the essential role school  boards play in authorizing new schools." Id. The majority also refers to the trial court's conclusion that the summary is misleading because it "is conspicuously silent about who or what would undertake the[] responsibilities [to operate, control, and supervise] for schools not established by the school board." Majority op. at 5.
Although the majority acknowledges that "we look to objective criteria" in evaluating the sufficiency of a ballot summary, majority op. at 10, it nonetheless focuses on subjective matters by asserting that the deficiency of the summary "is best demonstrated by the proponents of the proposed revision, who each give different meaning to the language of the revision, its title, and its summary." Majority op. at 9-10. Such subjective matters concerning what various proponents have said about a proposal are beside the point. The majority's line of analysis flies in the face of the principle established in our case law—to which the majority thoughtfully and meaninglessly tips its hat—that in determining whether a summary accurately describes a proposed amendment, "a court must look not to subjective criteria espoused by the amendment's sponsor but to objective criteria inherent in the amendment itself." Armstrong v. Harris, 773 So. 2d 7, 18 (Fla. 2000) (emphasis added).
Of course, the majority discusses the text of the amendment. But it does so not to determine if the summary accurately reflects the substance of the amendment. Instead, the majority—like the trial court—zeros in on perceived flaws in the amendment. The majority complains that the summary fails to explain "which categories of public schools will be affected, and who or what will have the authority to establish future public schools if voters approve the revision." Majority op. at 11. The majority also faults the use of "the phrase 'established by'" as one that is not "consistently used in Florida Statutes." Id. The majority sums up: "It is entirely unclear from both the text of the amendment and the ballot language which of these public schools, or categories of public schools, would be affected. Therefore, the problem 'lies not with what the summary says, but, rather, with what it does not say.'" Majority op. at 12-13 (emphasis added) (quoting Askew v. Firestone, 421 So. 2d 151, 156 (Fla. 1982)).
From all this it is clear that the majority is condemning the summary because the text of the amendment leaves open certain questions. The summary thus is rejected because of what the text of the amendment "does not say." Majority op. at 13 (quoting Askew, 421 So. 2d at 156). There is no requirement that a constitutional amendment resolve all questions concerning its implementation. And it is obvious that a proposed constitutional amendment is not bound by existing statutory terms. Here, as in the case of many constitutional provisions, space is established for the Legislature—which promulgates state policy through laws consistent with the Constitution—to make various policy choices related to implementation of the amendment. As the summary discloses, the amendment clearly affects schools not established by a school board. The policy choices related to such schools are properly left by the amendment to the Legislature. To conclude otherwise—as the majority does—is to attack the substance of the amendment itself.
The majority also concludes that the proposed amendment flies "under false colors," majority op. at 15, because the summary fails to inform the voters that currently "only district school boards may authorize charter schools." Majority op. at 14 (emphasis added). In support of this conclusion, the majority cites Duval County  School Board v. State Board of Education, 998 So. 2d 641, 642 (Fla. 1st DCA 2008), a decision that invalidated "section 1002.335, Florida Statutes, which established the 'Florida Schools of Excellence Commission' as an independent, state-level entity with the power to authorize charter schools throughout the State of Florida." To begin with, the term "authorize" (or any cognate term) is not found in the text of either the current constitutional provision or the proposed amendment. Reference to "charter schools" is likewise absent. And the Duval County decision does not establish an unfettered constitutional right of school boards to authorize charter schools.
The Duval County court recognized that the challenged statute "relegat[ed] local boards to essentially ministerial functions" concerning certain charter schools. Id. at 644. In invalidating the statute, the court stated: "This statute permits and encourages the creation of a parallel system of free public education escaping the operation and control of local elected school boards." Id. at 643 (emphasis added) (footnote omitted). The focus of the ruling was the removal from local school boards of "all the powers of operation, control and supervision of free public education specifically reserved in article IX, section 4(b) of the Florida Constitution . . . with regard to charter schools sponsored by the [Excellence] Commission." Id. (emphasis added). Nowhere does this decision establish the unfettered right of school boards to authorize or not authorize charter schools that is suggested by the majority opinion. Indeed, no such right currently exists under Florida law. See § 1002.33(6)(c)(3)(a), Fla. Stat. (2018) (providing process for appeal of school board denial of charter school application, authorizing State Board of Education to "remand the application to the sponsor with its written decision that the sponsor [school board] approve or deny the application" and providing that the school board "sponsor shall implement the decision of the State Board of Education"); see also Sch. Bd. of Palm Beach Cty. v. Fla. Charter Educ. Found., Inc., 213 So. 3d 356, 359 (Fla. 4th DCA 2017) (rejecting challenge to constitutionality of the charter school statute's appeal provision based on school board argument that the statute "empowers the State Board, and not the School Board, to determine the creation of a charter school"). The decision concerning the "authorization" of charter schools thus ultimately rests in the State Board of Education. So the disclosure the majority says should be made concerning the current state of the law would itself be misleading. The summary cannot be judged defective for failing to include a misleading statement.
In sum, the majority has failed to identify any defect in the summary.7  The people should not be prevented from making their  own decision concerning the merits of the proposed amendment. I strongly dissent from the decision to remove this proposed amendment from the ballot.
POLSTON and LAWSON, JJ., concur.

 

