 in part and dissenting in part). Similarly, the Attorney General asserted that this Court "should not undertake a meaningful review of compliance with the new constitutional  standards," but should instead await challenges to the plan brought in circuit courts over a period of time because the new standards were "too fact-intensive to be resolved in the instant original proceeding, which is limited to a narrow thirty-day window." Id. at 609, 626 (majority opinion). Now, the dissent goes one step further, contending that any and all challenges to the plan are precluded by this Court's "extremely limited" article III, section 16, facial review. The dissent's interpretation, which has never before been suggested by this Court as the meaning of article III, section 16, would allow the Legislature to circumvent the constitutional standards regarding "intent to favor or disfavor a political party or an incumbent" by concealing evidence of that intent from the public, knowing full well that discovery of any documents demonstrating this unconstitutional intent would never be reviewed by a court. While we do not suggest that this occurred during the 2012 redistricting process, these are the exact types of claims that must be subject to a fact-finder's scrutiny.
Accordingly, we conclude that the provision in article III, section 16(d), that this Court's declaratory judgment is "binding upon all the citizens of the state" does not provide a basis for the Court to exercise all writs jurisdiction in this case. Assuming the claims raised by the Coalition in its complaint are not the same as those resolved by this Court in 2012, the circuit court's ruling on the merits of those claims will not interfere with this Court's complete exercise of jurisdiction under article III, section 16. The issue of whether the claims raised by the Coalition are, in fact, identical to those already rejected by this Court is the basis of the Legislature's second all writs argument, which we address next.
 B. Whether the Coalition's Claims Are Identical to Those Already Rejected by This Court
As its second argument seeking to invoke this Court's all writs jurisdiction, the Legislature contends that the claims presented in the Coalition's complaint are identical to those presented to this Court in Apportionment II and, therefore, it is impossible for the Coalition to prevail on any of these claims without the circuit court overturning this Court's factual and legal determinations in Apportionment II. The Legislature argues that this Court's decision in Apportionment II was intended to adjudicate all claims that the Senate map violated constitutional standards and further contends that this Court's review was not "facial" because the Court engaged in a comprehensive and detailed examination of evidence.
We conclude that the Legislature's argument is without merit. As we have already explained, we repeatedly stated that the nature of our review in both Apportionment I and in the plurality decision in Apportionment II was a facial one. See, e.g., Apportionment I, 83 So. 3d at 614 (stating that this Court was undertaking its "constitutionally mandated review of the facial validity of the Senate and House plans" (emphasis added)); id. ("Guided by both this Court's precedent and a proper construction of the pertinent provisions contained within article III, we must determine whether the Legislature's joint resolution is facially consistent with the specific constitutionally mandated criteria under the federal and state constitutions." (emphasis added)); see also Apportionment II, 89 So. 3d at 881 ("Finally, we conclude that the opponents have failed to satisfy their burden of demonstrating any constitutional violation in this facial review." (emphasis added)).
 Further, the mere fact that we engaged in a detailed examination of objective and undisputed evidence to give meaning to the new state constitutional standards in the 2012 apportionment decisions does not lead to the conclusion that the fundamental nature of our review—that is, a facial review based on the limited record before the Court—was altered by the 2010 amendment introducing express new redistricting standards into the Florida Constitution. Although the Legislature contends that our review pursuant to article III, section 16, in effect, involved fact-finding, we repeatedly emphasized that our determinations in 2012 were based on the limited record before the Court and were constrained by the equally limited nature of the review this Court was able to conduct in the thirty-day facial proceeding mandated by article III, section 16. See, e.g., Apportionment I, 83 So. 3d at 645 ("We conclude that on this record, any facial claim regarding vote dilution under Florida's constitution fails." (emphasis added)); id. at 651 ("We conclude that there are no objective indicia of intent to disfavor an incumbent on this record." (emphasis added)); id. at 654-55 ("While this failure is relevant to other defects in the plan, we conclude on this record that the Senate plan does not facially dilute a minority group's voting strength or cause retrogression under Florida law." (emphasis added)). Indeed, we even specifically noted that the type of information available during our article III, section 16, review proceeding was "objective data," and we refused to consider an expert affidavit because we conducted our own "independent analysis using objective data." Apportionment I, 83 So. 3d at 612 & n.13.
In essence, this Court in the 2012 apportionment decisions conducted our facial review of the validity of the apportionment plan in a "meaningful way." Id. at 609. As Justice Labarga cogently explained in his concurring opinion in Apportionment I: "While it would have been preferable to have the luxury of more time, we were able, given advances in technology, to carefully examine both plans and make a facial determination based on this undisputed data within the time allotted by the constitution." Id. at 692 (Labarga, J., concurring) (emphasis added). "It would be a complete and unjustified derogation of our constitutional obligation," Justice Labarga stated, "if we ignore our constitutional mandate to examine the plans to determine whether they meet constitutional muster by simply saying we do not have the time." Id. (Labarga, J., concurring); see also Apportionment II, 89 So. 3d at 884  (describing Apportionment I as conducting a "meaningful facial review"); id. at 898 (Pariente, J., concurring) ("Restricted to only a facial review of the Legislature's intent, there will be times when this Court may seriously question the drawing of certain lines or the partisan balance of the plan but nevertheless uphold it because impermissible intent has not been proven based on the limited nature of the record before us." (emphasis added)). Likewise, Justice Lewis aptly articulated in his concurring opinion that, in 2012, "[a]s was the case in 2002, we [could] only conduct a facial review of [the] legislative plans and consider facts properly developed and presented in our record." Apportionment I, 83 So. 3d at 689 (Lewis, J., concurring) (emphasis added).
The Legislature's argument for all writs relief on this basis is grounded in the assumption that the claims raised in the Coalition's complaint are identical to those claims that were raised and resolved in this Court's article III, section 16, proceedings. However, the complaint does not set forth the evidence or exact arguments that the Coalition intends to rely upon in support of its claims. The answer to the  question of whether the claims are, in fact, identical to those already decided by this Court will, in part, depend on the evidence discovered and introduced through the adversarial proceeding in the circuit court. The resolution of such factual issues indisputably could never have been the subject of this Court's automatic thirty-day review.
As the circuit court cogently concluded with respect to whether the claims are the same, it is not possible to "make that determination from the pleadings themselves." Importantly, however, the circuit court recognized that relitigation of the same claims would not be appropriate:
To the extent that the plaintiffs [(the Coalition)] seek only a rehash of facial arguments made before the Florida Supreme Court, they will be disappointed. But to the extent their claims are as-applied challenges to the plans, they are entitled to develop and to present relevant evidence to support their claims. The [Legislature] likewise [is] entitled to prepare and present contrary evidence in defense.
Whether the Coalition's claims when litigated would amount to "a rehash of facial arguments made before" this Court remains to be seen. In any event, at this stage of the litigation, the Legislature's assertion that the complaint presents identical claims does not provide a basis for this Court to grant relief through an extraordinary writ. We conclude that the Legislature has not shown—especially in light of the circuit court's order—that allowing the circuit court case to proceed on these claims at this time would interfere with this Court's exercise of jurisdiction under article III, section 16.
 CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the Legislature has not met its burden of demonstrating that it is entitled to either a writ of prohibition or all writs relief because the circuit court has subject matter jurisdiction to adjudicate subsequent fact-based challenges to the legislative apportionment plan and because the circuit court's exercise of this jurisdiction will not interfere with the binding judgment rendered by this Court in Apportionment II. Accordingly, we deny the Legislature's petition for extraordinary relief.
It is so ordered.
LEWIS, QUINCE, and LABARGA, JJ., concur.
PERRY, J., specially concurs with an opinion.
CANADY, J., dissents with an opinion, in which POLSTON, C.J., concurs.
Concur by: PERRY  
Concur




PERRY, J., specially concurring.
I agree with the majority that, because the circuit court has subject matter jurisdiction to adjudicate as-applied challenges to the validity of the 2012 legislative apportionment plan, the Legislature has failed to demonstrate its entitlement to either a writ of prohibition or all writs relief. I write separately, however, to make explicit what the majority leaves implicit—that as-applied challenges in the circuit courts are not only permissible, but in many ways necessary.
The Legislature's contrary position that judicial review of its compliance with article III, section 21, is restricted to the time-sensitive, facial challenges in this Court is untenable. Such a position not only misreads article III, section 16, as the majority explains, but also would do violence to the right to access courts guaranteed by article I, section 21, of the Florida Constitution.
First, as the majority explains, our apportionment precedents have recognized the limits on this Court's ability to review  apportionment challenges as applied to particular cases. We are not a fact-finding body, and the limited, thirty-day period that article III, section 16, mandates scarcely allows meaningful fact-based review. Our duty under article III, section 16, is to determine the facial validity of the Legislature's apportionment scheme; nothing more, nothing less. The circuit courts, however, have a very different, yet important role. As trial courts, they assist in developing the contested facts of particular cases, thereby advancing the truth-seeking function of a trial. Article III, section 16, does nothing to divest the circuit courts of these important functions. In addition, and perhaps more problematic, the Legislature's position, if adopted, would infringe on the right to access courts guaranteed by article I, section 21, of the Florida Constitution.
In 2002, this Court explicitly "left open the opportunity for parties to raise as-applied challenges alleging 'a race-based equal protection claim, a Section 2 [of the Voting Rights Act] claim or a political gerrymandering claim in a court of competent jurisdiction.'" Florida Senate v. Forman, 826 So. 2d 279, 280 (Fla. 2002) (quoting In re Constitutionality of House Joint Resolution 1987, 817 So. 2d 819, 832 (Fla. 2002)). And, as the majority notes, neither party disputes that as-applied challenges arising under federal law are available in the circuit courts. The Legislature would draw the line, however, at claims alleging a violation of article III, section 21, of the Florida Constitution, because such a line, the Legislature argues, is necessary for finality and stability in the apportionment process. The problem with that argument, however, is that it overlooks an important right guaranteed by our own constitution—the right to access courts. See Art. I, § 21, Fla. Const.
Article I, section 21, of the Florida Constitution provides: "The courts shall be open to every person for redress of any injury, and justice shall be administered without sale, denial, or delay." As a general matter, the law undertakes to protect access to courts because the right to sue and defend is preservative of all other rights, and lies at the foundation of orderly government. See Chambers v. Baltimore & Ohio R.R. Co., 207 U.S. 142, 148, 28 S. Ct. 34, 52 L. Ed. 143, 6 Ohio L. Rep. 498 (1907). That the Florida Constitution specifically enumerates this right, moreover, makes it particularly deserving of protection. See Mitchell v. Moore, 786 So. 2d 521, 527 (Fla. 2001) (applying strict scrutiny).
With these observations, I join in the majority's opinion.
