 CANADY  
Concur




CANADY, Judge, Concurring specially.
Although I agree that the convictions and sentences should be affirmed, I disagree with the majority's analysis of Harris's due process claim.
Unlike the majority, I would reach the merits of Harris's claim. 7  With all due respect to the majority, its conclusion that the error asserted by Harris is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt is unsupportable. 
 "The harmless error test," as explained by the supreme court in State v. DiGuilio, 491 So. 2d 1129, 1135 (Fla. 1986), when applied to a jury's verdict convicting a defendant, "places the burden on the state, as the beneficiary of the error, to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the error complained of did not contribute to the verdict or, alternatively stated, that there is no reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction." The same test is generally applicable in the context of a sentencing error raised on direct appeal. See State v. Anderson, 905 So. 2d 111, 115-16 (Fla. 2005); see also Williams v. State, 720 So. 2d 590, 591 (Fla. 2d DCA 1998).
Here, during the sentencing proceeding, the trial court directed defense counsel to explain why Harris "wasn't at least possessing with intent to sell." The trial court then referred to facts relevant to the offense of possession with intent to sell. The trial court mentioned Harris's possession of "ten rocks," his admission to a police officer "that he was out there selling," and the officer's testimony that he observed Harris selling drugs. The trial court observed that "in here I think about that." This comment can only be understood as expressing the trial court's intention to consider in the sentencing proceeding--"in here"--the conduct of which Harris had been acquitted by the jury. There is no indication of any sort that the trial court subsequently abandoned its expressed intention to consider the acquitted conduct. The trial court went on to comment on Harris's record of prior offenses. But after doing so, the court once again referred to facts relevant to the acquitted conduct, stating the conclusion that Harris had been "hawking cocaine." Subsequently, the trial court--utilizing a Criminal Punishment Code scoresheet reflecting a lowest permissible prison sentence of 23.4 months--imposed the maximum prison sentence of 5 years.
For its conclusion that any error in considering the acquitted conduct was harmless, the majority relies on the trial court's comments on the prior offenses: "[W]e conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Harris would have received this five-year sentence based upon his prior record and recidivism, regardless of the trial court's opinion of the jury's verdict in this case."
The trial court's comments concerning Harris's prior offenses do not provide a sufficient basis for concluding that there is "no reasonable possibility" that the trial court's consideration of the acquitted conduct "contributed to" the trial court's decision to impose the statutory maximum sentence of five years. DiGuilio, 491 So. 2d at 1135. The fact that certain of the trial court's comments indicated that the sentence would be influenced by Harris's prior offenses does not erase the fact that other comments indicated that the sentence would be influenced by Harris's intent to sell. There is no basis for concluding that the trial court considered the prior offenses a wholly sufficient independent basis for imposition of the statutory maximum sentence. Based on the trial court's obvious focus on the circumstances pointing to intent to sell and its expressed intention to "think about" the acquitted conduct in the sentencing proceeding, there is at least a "reasonable possibility"--if not a probability--that the sentence was influenced by considerations which Harris asserts were improper under Doty. The majority's assertion to the contrary is implausible
Accordingly, I conclude that it is necessary to address the merits of Harris's argument that under Doty, the trial court violated Harris's due process rights. For the reasons I explain, I conclude that Doty  does support Harris's claim but that Doty is inconsistent with the decision of the Supreme Court in Watts.
Doty, 884 So. 2d at 549, held that "[i]t is a violation of due process for the court to rely on conduct of which the defendant has actually been acquitted when imposing a sentence." The defendant in Doty had been acquitted of sexual battery and burglary and convicted of less serious charges. In sentencing the defendant, the trial court considered the victim's testimony that "would have supported both charges" of sexual battery and burglary. 884 So. 2d at 550. The Fourth District reversed because "the state has failed to show that the court did not rely on the charges of which appellant was acquitted in meting out the most severe sentences available on two of the counts." Id. 8  There is no basis for distinguishing the instant case from Doty. 
Doty relied on Townsend v. Burke, 334 U.S. 736, 68 S. Ct. 1252, 92 L. Ed. 1690 (1948), which is--as I explain below--easily distinguishable from the circumstances presented by Doty. Doty made no mention, however, of Watts, which articulated a rule that is manifestly inconsistent with the rule stated in Doty.
In Watts, the Court considered whether a sentencing court, in sentencing the defendants under the federal sentencing guidelines, could consider conduct of the defendants' underlying charges of which they had been acquitted. The Court pointed out that a jury's acquittal is not a rejection of facts; it is merely "'an acknowledgement that the government failed to prove an essential element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.' " 519 U.S. at 155 (quoting United States v. Putra, 78 F.3d 1386, 1394 (9th Cir. 1996)(Wallace, C.J., dissenting)). After noting that "application of the preponderance [of the evidence] standard at sentencing generally satisfies due process," Watts, 519 U.S. at 156, the Court held "that a jury's verdict of acquittal does not prevent the sentencing court from considering conduct underlying the acquitted charge, so long as that conduct has been proved by a preponderance of the evidence," id. at 157.
Here, the record is sufficient to support a conclusion by the trial court that the State proved by a preponderance of the evidence that Harris sold cocaine; the arresting officer testified that he observed Harris conduct a drug transaction and that Harris admitted selling cocaine. Therefore, under Watts the trial court did not err in considering such evidence in sentencing Harris.
Townsend, 334 U.S. at 741, a habeas corpus proceeding, is easily distinguishable because it involved an uncounseled  defendant who "was sentenced on the basis of assumptions concerning his criminal record which were materially untrue." In Townsend, the sentencing court relied on both prior acquitted charges and prior dismissed charges and there was no factual basis to support the trial court's assumption that the defendant was guilty of the charged offenses. "[I]t [was] the careless or designed pronouncement of sentence on a foundation . . . extensively and materially false, which the [defendant] had no opportunity to correct by the services which counsel would provide, that render[ed] the proceedings lacking in due process." Id.
I recognize that the holding in Watts is limited by the more recent Sixth Amendment decisions in Apprendi; Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S. Ct. 2531, 159 L. Ed. 2d 403 (2004); United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220, 125 S. Ct. 738, 160 L. Ed. 2d 621 (2005); and Cunningham v. California, 127 S. Ct. 856, 166 L. Ed. 2d 856 (2007), and that any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum (which includes the guidelines maximum in a mandatory guidelines sentencing scheme) must be submitted to the jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Here, however, Harris was sentenced under the Criminal Punishment Code to a sentence within the statutory maximum. Accordingly, Apprendi and its progeny have no application. See United States v. Dorcely, 372 U.S. App. D.C. 170, 454 F.3d 366, 371 (D.C. Cir. 2006)(discussing continuing vitality of Watts, holding "that a sentencing court may base a sentence on acquitted conduct without offending the defendant's Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury," and observing that "[i]n so holding, we agree with every circuit that has considered the question post-Booker"); United States v. Duncan, 400 F.3d 1297, 1304 (11th Cir. 2005)(applying the Watts rule and stating that "Booker does not suggest that the consideration of acquitted conduct violates the Sixth Amendment as long as the judge does not impose a sentence that exceeds what is authorized by the jury verdict"); People v. Dove, 124 Cal. App. 4th 1, 21 Cal.Rptr. 3d 52, 59 (Cal. Ct. App. 2004) (citing Watts and stating that "acquittal on the charge of possession for sale did not bind the trial court" and that "because Apprendi and Blakely did not apply, the trial court was free to redetermine the personal use issue based on the preponderance of the evidence").
The decision in Doty cannot be reconciled with the holding in Watts. I would reject Harris's argument since it is based on a legal principle-as articulated in Doty-that is inconsistent with the Supreme Court's decision in Watts. 9  

 

