.
The majority adopts a rule requiring that suit be brought by a third party claimant against an insured before an insurer can enter a legally enforceable agreement with the third party to settle the third party's claim. Because I conclude that Florida's nonjoinder statute cannot reasonably be interpreted as establishing such a rule, I dissent. 
 The core of the majority's holding in this case is that "a presuit undertaking or agreement between an injured third party and an insurer about the adjustment of a claim [fails to] satisfy the alternative condition  precedent of settlement described in [section 627.4136(1)]" because "[s]uch a presuit undertaking or agreement does not qualify as a 'settlement' within the meaning of the nonjoinder statute." According to the majority's reading of the statute, a settlement must "occur within the course of pending litigation in which the insured [is] already a party."
The majority's understanding of the term "settlement" in section 627.4136 is at odds with both the plain meaning of the statutory text and the statutory purpose which the courts have previously identified as the basis for the statute. And the majority's foray into the statutory history of the nonjoinder statute falls short of providing a persuasive basis for the restrictive reading of the term "settlement" on which its decision relies.
A settlement is "[a]n agreement ending a dispute or lawsuit." Black's Law Dictionary 1404 (8th ed. 2004). A settlement may be entered after litigation has been instituted with respect to the claim which is settled. A settlement may also be entered prior to the initiation of litigation. See Global Travel Mktg., Inc. v. Shea, 908 So. 2d 392, 400 (Fla. 2005) (discussing requirements regarding "[a] presuit settlement on behalf of a minor"). The term settlement has a well-established and unequivocal meaning.
In considering the motion to dismiss for violation of the nonjoinder statute, the circuit court was required to accept the allegations of the complaint as true. See Koehler v. Merrill Lynch & Co., 706 So. 2d 1370, 1372 (Fla. 2d DCA 1998) ("When confronted with a motion to dismiss, the court is required to take the allegations of the complaint as true and to decide only questions of law."). Hazen's complaint alleged that an agreement had been reached between Hazen and Allstate. According to the complaint, Hazen reached a settlement with Allstate based on Allstate's "agree[ment] that its insured was liable for the accident and resulting property damage."
When an insurer acting as the agent of its insured enters a settlement agreement, the insured is bound by the agreement. See Pregony v. Custer, 558 So. 2d 114, 115-16 (Fla. 4th DCA 1990) ("In this case it is clear [the insurance company] was acting as [the insured's] agent in seeking a settlement of petitioners' possible claims. Eliminating the ability of an insurer to bind its insured in the settlement process would render any attempts to avoid litigation by settlement meaningless and mere academic exercises."); see also Ga. Cas. Co. v. Mann, 242 Ky. 447, 46 S.W.2d 777, 779 (Ky. 1932) (holding that insurance company is both the insurer and the agent of the insured).
Since Hazen--according to the allegations of the complaint--had "obtain[ed] a settlement . . . against a person who is an insured," the condition precedent for the accrual of a cause of action by Hazen, as a third party, against Allstate, as an insurer, was satisfied and the bar of the nonjoinder statute was not applicable. § 627.4136(1), (2). Based on the plain language of the statute, I conclude that the nonjoinder statute does not protect an insurer from a suit for breach of contract arising from its failure to perform under a settlement agreement the insurer has entered into with a third party on behalf of an insured.
"The cardinal rule of statutory construction is that courts will give a statute its plain and ordinary meaning." Weber v. Dobbins, 616 So. 2d 956, 958 (Fla. 1993).
When the statute is clear and unambiguous, courts will not look behind the statute's plain language for legislative intent or resort to rules of statutory construction to ascertain intent. In such instance, the statute's plain and ordinary  meaning must control, unless this leads to an unreasonable result or a result clearly contrary to legislative intent. When the statutory language is clear, "courts have no occasion to resort to rules of construction--they must read the statute as written, for to do otherwise would constitute an abrogation of legislative power."
Daniels v. Fla. Dep't of Health, 898 So. 2d 61, 64 (Fla. 2005) (citations omitted) (quoting Nicoll v. Baker, 668 So. 2d 989, 990-91 (Fla. 1996)).
The majority does not--and could not reasonably--contend that the common, ordinary meaning of settlement is limited to settlements entered after suit has been filed. Instead, the majority concludes that settlement in subsection (1) should be read restrictively because such a reading is supported by the use of the term in subsection (4) as well as the statutory history.
In my view, the majority--by failing to give effect to the plain meaning of settlement in subsection (1)--departs from the cardinal rule of statutory construction. In doing so, the majority does not assert that subsection (1) is ambiguous. Nor does the majority assert that the plain meaning of subsection (1) leads to "an unreasonable result or a result clearly contrary to legislative intent." Without first determining that the statute is ambiguous or that enforcement of its plain language is manifestly problematic, the majority embarks on an exercise in "imaginative reconstruction" 6  of the legislature's intent. If such an exercise is ever justified, it certainly is not justified in this case. 
 Interpreting settlement in subsection (1) in its common and ordinary sense does not create a conflict between subsection (1) and subsection (4). Subsection (4) is most reasonably understood in context as a provision setting forth the particular procedure to be followed when a settlement is reached after suit has been brought. There is no conflict, inconsistency, or tension between a statutory provision providing an exception for all settlements from the operation of the nonjoinder statute and a provision specifying the particular procedure to be followed when a settlement is agreed to during litigation. Full effect can be given to subsection (4) without imposing a restrictive reading in the unambiguous text of subsection (1). Cf. Lareau v. State, 573 So. 2d 813, 815 (Fla. 1991) ("[W]hen two conflicting or ambiguous provisions of the same legislative act were intended to serve the same purpose, they must be read in pari materia to ascertain the overall legislative intent and to harmonize the provisions so that the fullest effect can be given to each.").
The majority's reading of the statute cannot be persuasively defended on the basis of the purpose of the statute. As the court recognized in VanBibber, 439 So. 2d at 883, by enacting the 1983 version of the nonjoinder statute the legislature sought to displace the judicially created rule that "authorized, simultaneously, a suit in tort against a tortfeasor and a claim against that tortfeasor's insurance company." "The legislative intent behind the statute is to ensure that the availability of insurance has no influence on the jury's determination of the insured's liability and damages." Gen. Star Indem. Co., 895 So. 2d at 1138; see also Merchs. & Businessmen's Mut. Ins. Co. v. Bennis, 636 So. 2d 593, 594 (Fla. 4th DCA 1994) ("Public policy against disclosure of insurance coverage to the jury underlies the non-joinder statute.");  Hough v. Huffman, 555 So. 2d 942, 944 (Fla. 5th DCA 1990) (stating that "the reason for [the nonjoinder statute] was to prevent undue prejudice to insurance companies, and to avoid 'deep-pocket' jury verdicts"). Contrary to the majority's suggestion, the purpose or intent which the courts have identified as the basis for the nonjoinder statute does not support--much less require--the reading the majority has imposed on the statute to justify the dismissal of Hazen's suit against Allstate. 
 The claim at issue here is a contract claim against an insurer based on the insurer's alleged agreement to settle a tort claim against its insured. Adjudication of the action will not require a determination of the insured's liability and damages. Instead, it will involve determining the existence and scope of the alleged settlement agreement and measuring the damages for the alleged breach of the agreement by Allstate. The insured's liability and damages on the underlying tort claim are irrelevant to the action for breach of the settlement agreement.
Where there is a settlement agreement between an insurer and a third party, the third party has a right of action against the insurer based on the third party's interest in the promise of the insurer made in the settlement agreement. Since there is a direct contractual relationship arising from the settlement agreement, the third party's right of action need not be based on the assertion of a beneficial interest of the third party in the tortfeasor's liability insurance policy. See Philip J. Padovano, Florida Civil Practice § 11.6, at 437 (2007 ed.) ("A settlement agreement creates new contractual rights and duties which may be enforced in place of the underlying claims and defenses.").
The purpose of the nonjoinder statute has no more application to Hazen's claim against Allstate than it would to a claim brought for breach of a settlement agreement that was entered by Allstate after a tort suit had been instituted. Although the tort claim no doubt provides the background for Hazen's contract claim, the tort claim would also provide the background for a suit to enforce a settlement agreement entered during litigation--which unquestionably is enforceable. It is thus nonsensical to contend that--simply because a tort claim lurks in the background--the purpose of the nonjoinder statute comes into play.
The statutory history which the majority recounts serves ultimately as nothing more than the springboard for the majority's speculation about the legislature's purpose in adopting and amending the nonjoinder statute. The majority's speculation is based on the unsupported premise that the 1982 version of the nonjoinder statute precluded the enforcement of presuit settlements entered by insurers with third-party claimants. There is no Florida authority to support that understanding of the 1982 version of the statute. And there is significant authority from other jurisdictions to support the conclusion that nonjoinder statutes have no application to settlement agreements between insurers and third-party claimants. See Howton, 507 So. 2d at 450-51; see also Railsback v. Mid-Century Ins. Co., 2004 SD 64, 680 N.W.2d 652, 656 (S.D. 2004) (stating that "'a claimant may become entitled to bring a direct action where the insurer has taken on a new and independent obligation to the victim as a result of the insurer's efforts to negotiate a settlement of the victim's claim'") (quoting 7 Lee R. Russ & Thomas F. Segalla, Couch on Insurance 3d § 104:6 (2003)).
But even if the majority's view concerning the meaning of the 1982 version of the statute is accepted, it does not justify departing from the plain meaning of the current  version of the statute which came into force in 1990.
The majority thus departs from the unambiguous meaning of the statutory text to reach a result that is inconsistent with the purpose that the supreme court and this court--among others--have identified as the basis for the legislature's adoption of the nonjoinder statute. In doing so, the majority also sets aside the principle that "settlements are highly favored and will be enforced whenever possible." Robbie v. City of Miami, 469 So. 2d 1384, 1385 (Fla. 1985); see also Spiegel v. H. Allen Holmes, Inc., 834 So. 2d 295, 297 (Fla. 4th DCA 2002) ("Settlement agreements are favored as a means to conserve judicial resources. Courts will enforce them when it is possible to do so."). By adopting a rule under which parties wishing to settle a claim are required to bring suit before entering an enforceable settlement agreement, the majority adopts a rule that is "directly contrary to the policy of the law favoring amicable settlement of disputes and the avoidance of litigation." DeWitt v. Miami Transit Co., 95 So. 2d 898, 901 (Fla. 1957). The result of the adoption of this rule will be the needless expenditure of judicial resources and the resources of parties who wish to settle without litigation.
In justifying its decision, the majority makes reference to the "additional circumstance" that Hazen's claim involves "a mere allegation of the insurer's breach of an oral 'agreement' to adjust a claim." (Emphasis added.  ) It is clear from the majority's reasoning, however, that the holding in this case does not turn on the fact that the agreement alleged by Hazen is an oral agreement. Nothing in either the text of the statute or the statutory history recounted in the majority opinion suggests that the nonjoinder statute prohibits the enforcement of oral settlement agreements. Nowhere does the majority state that the nonjoinder statute requires that settlement agreements be in writing. Nothing in the statute suggests any distinction between oral and written settlements.
The majority's policy concerns regarding oral settlement agreements with respect to third-party insurance claims may well have merit. A strong argument might be made for requiring that settlement agreements with respect to third-party claims be in writing. See 7A Lee R. Russ & Thomas F. Segalla, Couch on Insurance 3d § 105.18 ("Typically, a condition precedent to direct action involving either a judgment or agreement requires that the agreement be in writing, and that it be between the insured, the insurer, and the injured claimant."). But it is the legislature's prerogative to consider and act on such policy concerns; such policy matters are not within this court's province.
In the statute of frauds, section 725.01, Florida Statutes (2002), the legislature has addressed the policy issues regarding the enforcement of certain oral promises. The agreement between Hazen and Allstate, however, does not fall within the scope of the statute of frauds. Although a superficial view of the matter might lead to the conclusion that Hazen's action seeks "to charge the defendant upon [a] special promise to answer for the debt, default or miscarriage of another person," § 725.01, a liability insurer's agreement with a third party to settle a claim against an insured does not constitute such a "special promise."
This is so because "the consideration for the promise is in fact . . . desired by the promisor [the insurer] mainly for [its] own economic advantage, rather than in order to benefit the third person [the insured]." Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 116 (1981). See Klag v. Home Ins. Co., 116 Ga. App. 678, 158 S.E.2d 444, 451 (Ga. Ct. App. 1967)  ("[W]here the insurer agrees to settle its potential liability as well as the potential liability of the insured, the oral promise by the insurer to settle or pay the claim against the insured is an original undertaking and need not be in writing."); Ortiz v. Travelers Ins. Co., 2 Mich. App. 548, 140 N.W.2d 791, 793 (Mich. Ct. App. 1966) (holding that statute of frauds did not bar enforcement of oral settlement agreement between third party and insurer); Zager v. Gubernick, 205 Pa. Super. 168, 208 A.2d 45, 49 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1965) ("The statute of frauds does not apply because the agreement [with third party] was in settlement of defendant's own obligation as insurer, not the debt or default of another."); Carter v. Allstate Ins. Co., 962 S.W.2d 268, 270 (Tex. App. 1998) ("When Allstate took the initiative to settle the claim for which its insured had not yet become legally responsible, . . . it was settling not only its insured's potential liability but its own possible obligation to pay and its own duty to defend its insured. The oral promise to settle was an original undertaking, not a promise to answer for the debt of the insured.").
I have three final observations to offer concerning the impact of the rule adopted by the majority. The first point relates to the majority's expressed concern for the "motoring public." The second observation relates to the potential undesirable impact on insurers. The third point concerns the trap created for settling third-party claimants.
With all due respect to the majority--which I believe to be acting sincerely and in good faith--I must say that I find some irony in the suggestion that allowing the enforcement of presuit settlement agreements "would discourage insurers from undertaking the prompt adjustment and settlement of meritorious claims." What the majority's decision contemplates is that insurers should be allowed to "promptly" settle third-party claims without having any liability for breaching the promises the insurers make to the third-party claimants. According to the majority, requiring insurers to be held accountable for breaching the promises they make "would ultimately be detrimental to the motoring public." In my view, this line of reasoning inverts reality.
The decision the majority makes in this case benefits Allstate, but the rule adopted by the majority is a double-edged sword. If a presuit settlement agreement is unenforceable by a third party against an insurer, can such a presuit agreement be enforced against the third party by the insurer? Under the principle of mutuality of obligation, an agreement that is unenforceable against the insurer cannot be enforced by the insurer. "[M]utuality of obligation is essential to the formation of a bilateral contract." Balter v. Pan Am. Bank of Hialeah, 383 So. 2d 256, 257 (Fla. 3d DCA 1980). "It is basic hornbook law that a contract which is not mutually enforceable is an illusory contract." Pan-Am Tobacco Corp. v. Dep't of Corr., 471 So. 2d 4, 5 (Fla. 1984). Under such an "illusory contract," "neither side may be bound." Id.
As a consequence of the majority's decision, an unwary third-party claimant who enters a presuit settlement agreement with an insurer prior to the expiration of the statute of limitations on the tort claim may well be foreclosed by the statute of limitations from pursuing its tort claim by the time that the third-party claimant learns that the settlement agreement is unenforceable. Such a harsh result is particularly troubling when it flows from a judge-created rule that is inconsistent with the plain meaning of the governing statutory text.
Finally, as the majority notes, the trial court also based the dismissal of Hazen's  claim on the ground that subject matter jurisdiction was lacking. It is therefore necessary to offer a brief explanation of why we should not affirm the dismissal on this ground.
It is not clear why the circuit court dismissed the action for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. The circuit court's order simply states that the motion to dismiss is "GRANTED based upon Florida's Non-Joinder Statute and a lack of subject matter jurisdiction." In addition, Allstate's motion to dismiss only alleges that "[t]he Court lacks subject matter jurisdiction," without supporting argument.
"[S]ubject-matter jurisdiction concerns the power of the trial court to deal with a class of cases to which a particular case belongs." Cunningham v. Standard Guar. Ins. Co., 630 So. 2d 179, 181 (Fla. 1994). "For purposes of subject matter jurisdiction, the circuit courts of Florida have jurisdiction over any action at law in which the matter in controversy exceeds $ 15,000, exclusive of interest, costs, and attorney's fees." Allen v. Walker, 810 So. 2d 1090, 1092 (Fla. 4th DCA 2002); see § 26.012(2)(a), Fla. Stat. (2005); § 34.01(1)(c), Fla. Stat. (2005). "The jurisdiction of the circuit court is determined by the sums claimed and put into controversy in good faith." Crown Bank v. U.S. Mortgage Network Corp., 705 So. 2d 100, 101 (Fla. 5th DCA 1998).
Hazen alleged in her complaint that her damages exceed $ 15,000. There is no indication in the record that Allstate claimed that Hazen alleged this amount in bad faith. Therefore, the circuit court had subject matter jurisdiction over Hazen's claim. See Allen, 810 So. 2d at 1092 ("Here, the complaint sought damages in excess of $ 15,000. Therefore, the circuit court had proper jurisdiction over the subject matter of the claim.").
Because I conclude that the trial court was not justified in relying on either the nonjoinder statute or a lack of subject matter jurisdiction to dismiss Hazen's action, I would reverse the trial court's decision and remand for further proceedings.  

 

