 in part and dissents in part with an opinion in which POLSTON, J., concurs.
 APPENDIX  
THE FLORIDA RULES OF JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION
RULE 2.215. TRIAL COURT ADMINISTRATION
(a) [No change]
(b) Chief Judge.
(1) - (6) [No change]
[EDITOR'S NOTE: TEXT IN ITALICS IS UNDERLINED IN THE SOURCE.]
(7) The chief judge shall regulate the use of all court facilities, regularly examine the dockets of the courts under the chief judge's administrative supervision, and require a report on the status of the matters on the dockets. The chief judge may take such action as may be necessary to cause the dockets to be made current. The chief judge shall monitor the status of all 
pending postconviction or collateral relief proceedings 
brought byfor defendants who have been sentenced to death from the time that the mandate affirming the death sentence has been issued by the supreme court and shall take the necessary actions to assure that such cases proceed without undue delay. On the first day of every January, April, July, and October, the chief judge shall inform the chief justice of the supreme court of the status of all such 
pendingcases.
(8) - (13) [No change]
(c) - (f) [No change]
(g) Duty to Expedite Priority Cases. Every judge has a duty to expedite priority cases to the extent reasonably possible. Priority cases are those cases that have been assigned a priority status or assigned an expedited disposition schedule by statute, rule of procedure, case law, or otherwise. Particular attention shall be given to all juvenile dependency and termination of parental rights cases, cases involving families and children in need of services, 
andchallenges involving elections and proposed constitutional amendments, and capital postconviction cases. As part of an effort to make capital postconviction cases a priority, the chief judge shall have the discretion to create a postconviction division to handle capital postconviction, as well as non-capital postconviction cases, and may assign one or more judges to that division.
(h) - (i) [No change]
 Committee Notes
[No change]
 Court Commentary
[No change]
 Criminal Court Steering Committee Note
2014 Amendment. Capital postconviction cases were added to the list of priority cases.
RULE 2.535. COURT REPORTING
(a) - (h) [No change]
(i) Court Reporting Services in Capital Cases. The chief judge, after consultation with the circuit court judges in the circuit, shall enter an administrative order developing and implementing a circuit-wide plan for court reporting in all trials in which the state seeks the death penalty and in capital postconviction proceedings. The plan shall prohibit the use of digital court reporting as the primary court reporting system and shall require the use of all measures necessary to expedite the preparation of the transcript, including but not limited to:
(1) where available, the use of an approved court reporter




 [*1177contd]  
[EDITOR'S NOTE: The page numbers of this document may appear to be out of sequence; however, this pagination accurately reflects the pagination of the original published document.]
LEWIS, J., concurring.
I agree with the adoption of these rules, but I continue to have multiple concerns. First, we must be vigilant to make certain that qualified postconviction counsel is both available and engaged in this process as the system moves forward. The process must be effectively monitored for the proper functioning of the process guided by counsel.
Second, the entire judicial system seems somewhat uncertain with regard to court reporting because within the last few years, we have attempted to manipulate the type of court reporting among different approaches. From time to time, it seems, types and models of court reporting move to and from favor to disfavor. Employee models, independent contractor models, digital, computerized, real-time and otherwise seem to flow into and out of favor. We must have a solid court reporting system to support a level of comfort with the entire criminal justice process.
Finally, I continue to believe that we can only overcome unconscionable and unacceptable systemic delays that undermine justice if we begin the discussion and analysis as to the proper roles of the respective State Attorney offices for the direct trial proceedings, and the Attorney General offices for postconviction collateral review proceedings. As in civil litigation, we have clearly understood and placed the burden of moving cases forward to justice on the shoulders of the party prosecuting the action so there must be some proper responsibility on the shoulders of the State in this area as the party ultimately responsible for prosecution of the underlying action.
