 in part and dissenting in part.
I dissent from the adoption in rule 2.210(a)(2)(F) and rule 2.215(c) of term limits for the chief judges of the district and circuit courts. Although term limits for chief judges might be the right policy, this Court should not adopt such a policy without first receiving input from the trial courts and the district courts.
QUINCE, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I agree with many of the changes included in the majority opinion concerning the governance structure of the judicial branch. For the most part I believe that most of the changes will result in a more efficient and effective branch of government — the judiciary. However, I cannot agree to two aspects of these changes.
First, I do not agree with the change to rule 2.205 (a)(1)(C) that would require that all judicial branch "commissions, committees, task forces, work groups, and similar study or advisory groups be established by the Court." In order to have an effective chief justice and to strengthen the chief's position, the chief should have the authority to establish such commissions and other groups without the necessity of having it approved by the entire court. I am sure that the chief when feasible will bring the issue to the entire Court, but I would not tie her or his hands by having this as a requirement.
Secondly, I would not extend the chief justice's term to a possible eight years under rule 2.205 (a)(2)(A). While the possible term of the chief justice should be more than two years, I would cap the term at four years. The provision concerning the removal of a chief justice may seem to provide a safety valve to the eight years, but the likelihood of using that provision is probably remote. Instead of putting the justices through what could be a turbulent situation, I would simply have a two-year term with a possible successive two-year term and no more.
LEWIS, J., dissenting.
Under a proposal of "Governance," the majority in many ways takes the Court system backward to re-create circumstances similar to those found by the citizens of Florida to be unworkable and abusive over 40 years ago. The changes of today in many instances are simply that, change for the purpose of change without regard to whether a significant problem exists. The process that generated the changes was significantly impacted by perceptions from other states that will only lead to the problems from those foreign states being transposed into Florida when  the perceived problem which generated the proposed change did not previously exist here.
The most significant alterations that will have a practical adverse impact are centered upon the Chief Justice and chief judges, changes that will not improve effective or efficient management but only become divisive measures that will polarize and politicize positions within the court system. The approach of change simply to make a change based on outside views is not well-considered nor one that should be adopted by this Court system.

 

