 in part and dissents in part with an opinion, in which POLSTON, J., concurs.
Concur by: LABARGA; LEWIS (In Part); CANADY (In Part)  
Concur




LABARGA, C.J., concurring.
I fully concur with the order entered today. This Court was called upon to carry out its constitutional duty to review the judgment of the circuit court and the congressional redistricting map enacted by the Legislature. That map was found constitutionally defective in several respects, as fully explained in our decision in this litigation. See League of Women Voters of Fla. v. Detzner, 40 Fla. L. Weekly S432, 172 So. 3d 363, 2015 WL 4130852 (Fla. July 9, 2015). Unfortunately, the Legislature could not agree on a remedial plan during the special session that was called for that purpose. We remain mindful that the task of congressional redistricting under our current constitutional structure falls first and foremost upon the Legislature. That is precisely why this Court remanded the case to the circuit court for further proceedings in which the Legislature was given the opportunity to correct the map's constitutional deficiencies.
It has been the goal of this Court that the Legislature will complete its task and adopt a remedial map in accordance with the directions in our July 9, 2015, opinion. Sufficient time exists for the Legislature to accomplish this task before the matter is scheduled for a hearing before the trial court, should the House and Senate agree to convene for another special session. However, if the two houses of the Legislature cannot join together to pass a plan within this time, the judiciary must take steps to ensure that a constitutionally compliant congressional redistricting plan is in place, as noted in the order and requested in the House's motion, to provide certainty to candidates and voters.
I also agree with the majority that such a plan cannot be an interim or provisional one. An orderly and foreseeable constitutional end point must be reached in this process. Anything less makes a mockery of the will of the voters who passed the Fair Districts amendment. The order issued today accomplishes these goals in a fair manner with full opportunity provided to the Legislature to fulfill its duty to jointly adopt a remedial map that complies with this Court's July 9, 2015, opinion.
PERRY, J., concurs.
