.
Because I have concluded that there is no clearly established law which precludes ex parte discussions between the providers who were jointly responsible for the treatment of Mr. Lemieux, I dissent.
The majority correctly states that we should grant the petition for certiorari only if there has been a departure from the essential requirements of law. In order for an appellate court to conclude that a trial court's order departs from the essential requirements of law, the reviewing court must determine that the order violates a clearly established principle of law. State v. Pettis, 520 So. 2d 250, 254 (Fla. 1988) ("While some pretrial evidentiary rulings may qualify for certiorari, it must be remembered that the extraordinary writ is reserved for those situations where 'there has been a violation of a clearly established principle of law resulting in a miscarriage of justice.' ") (citing Combs v. State, 436 So. 2d 93, 96 (Fla. 1983)); Malloy v. Gunster, Yoakley, Valdes-Fauli & Stewart, P.A., 850 So. 2d 578 (Fla. 2d DCA 2003); Allstate Ins. Co. v. Hodges, 855 So. 2d 636, 2003 Fla. App. LEXIS 12217, 28 Fla. L. Weekly D1910 (Fla. 2d DCA Aug. 15, 2003). 
None of the cases on which the majority relies dealt with the communication of information related to the prior treatment of a patient by one provider who was responsible for that prior treatment to another provider who was also responsible for the care of the patient during the same time period. What the majority refers to as a "wealth of controlling case law" simply does not address the distinct issue that the trial court was called on to address. None  of the cases cited by the majority hold that a disclosure by one provider to another is authorized only if it is made in the course of the treatment provided to the patient. There is thus nothing in the case law articulating a clearly established principle of law which is inconsistent with the trial court's ruling.
Nor does the text of the statute clearly establish that the trial court's ruling is subject to correction by way of certiorari. The provision of section 456.057(6) authorizing the disclosure of confidential information "to other health care practitioners and providers involved in the care or treatment of the patient" may reasonably be interpreted in the way it was interpreted by the trial court. The statute does not expressly limit the authorized disclosures to those disclosures that are made during the course of the patient's treatment. On the face of the statute, it is not unreasonable to understand the authorized disclosures as encompassing information communicated from one provider to another provider after their joint care and treatment of the patient has ceased. While I might agree with the majority that such an interpretation of the statute is on balance not the most reasonable interpretation, that does not mean that it constitutes a violation of a clearly established principle of law.
I also note that the statutory provision authorizing disclosure by one provider to another can only reasonably be understood as extending to communications made through the employees and agents (including attorneys) of the providers. Interpreting the statute to prohibit such disclosure through employees and agents would impose an entirely unworkable limitation on the exchange of information which the statute clearly contemplates and authorizes.
I acknowledge that in Allstate Insurance Co. v. Kaklamanos, 843 So. 2d 885, 890 (Fla. 2003), the supreme court stated that " 'clearly established law' can derive from a variety of legal sources, including recent controlling case law, rules of court, statutes, and constitutional law." But surely this does not mean that there is a clearly established principle of law whenever the trial court has made a ruling based on its interpretation of a statute, rule, or constitutional provision and the reviewing court disagrees with that interpretation. If certiorari were appropriate in all such cases, the requirement for the violation of a clearly established principle of law would be rendered virtually meaningless. It is more reasonable to understand Kaklamanos as referring to circumstances where the statute, rule, or constitutional provision is so perspicuous that it is only subject to one reasonable interpretation. Such circumstances are not present here.
Accordingly, I conclude that the petitioners have failed to establish that the trial court departed from the essential requirements of law. I therefore dissent from the majority's decision to grant the petition for writ of certiorari.  

 

