 in result with an opinion, in which POLSTON, J., concurs.
Concur by: PARIENTE; LEWIS; CANADY  
Concur




PARIENTE, J., concurring.
I concur in the affirmance of the defendant's conviction and death sentence. The defendant entered a plea of guilty for the tragic murder of two victims and the attempted murder of a third victim—all of whom he shot at close range. The grim sequence of the robbery and ensuing murders was documented by the convenience store's security camera. The defendant, who was twenty-four years old at the time of the murders, waived a penalty phase before a jury. I agree that the defendant knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived his right to a jury trial, and that therefore the defendant "cannot avail himself to relief pursuant to Hurst." Majority op. at 43.
I write only to highlight, as demonstrated through the trial court's excellent sentencing order, the sentencing judge's profound understanding of how Mullens's dysfunctional upbringing influenced the person he became as an adult:
However, while the Court firmly believes that the Defendant was well aware of the criminality of his actions, competent evidence was presented that suggests that the Defendant's ability to conform his conduct to the requirements of law was substantially impaired. In addition to Dr. Machlus's testimony regarding the Defendant's mental health, the Court also heard testimony from several of the Defendant's family members regarding his upbringing. The totality of their testimonies painted a very bleak picture of the Defendant's childhood and background.
The Defendant's father was incarcerated in prison for the majority of the Defendant's life. However, during the periods of his release, his father admitted to brutally beating the Defendant's mother in front of the Defendant and his siblings, and to also viciously beating the  children themselves. Like his father, the Defendant's brother also took to inflicting violence on the Defendant, horribly beating him on several occasions. In addition to these beatings, the Defendant's father was constantly seeking out narcotics and abusing them in front of the Defendant. His father would often steal household funds as well as others' property to pay for drugs and alcohol. The Defendant was no older than five when his father taught him how to shoplift in order to supply the family with food and other items they needed. Similarly, the Defendant's mother was an alcoholic who abused both alcohol and marijuana in the presence of the Defendant. His parents' addictions led to a lack of residential stability and inadequate resources to supply food, clothes or utilities, forcing the Defendant and his siblings to go without these items.
The testimony from the Defendant's family members made clear that throughout his formative years, the Defendant was exposed to severe physical and emotional abuse, rampant alcohol and drug abuse and lessons on how to commit crimes. Compounding the effects of the Defendant's childhood is the lack of any "protective factors." Dr. Machlus testified that the Defendant did not have any of the protective factors that would typically insulate an individual from experiencing the negative consequences of such an upbringing.
Additionally, when the Defendant was sixteen years old he was sentenced to prison. The Defendant's mother testified that when he returned from prison, the Defendant was "very different," and that he had become "angry" and "paranoid." She testified that his behavior worsened to the point that their neighbors were concerned enough to start a petition to have Defendant removed from the neighborhood. Having tried to convince the Defendant to seek professional help and failing, even the Defendant's mother thought his condition had become so irrevocable that she believed he would have been better off dead.
Furthermore, both Dr. Machlus and the Defendant's mother testified as to the Defendant's predisposition to psychological disorders and substance abuse. It was well established that the Defendant's lineage is saturated with individuals who suffered not only from psychological disorders, but also severely abused drugs and alcohol. As previously noted, Dr. Machlus testified that individuals who suffer from both Bipolar Disorder and substance abuse are six times more likely to commit violent criminal acts as opposed to those individuals who suffer solely from Bipolar Disorder. Given the Defendant's mental health and substance abuse history, family upbringing and lack of protective factors, it is evident that the Defendant lacks the ability to conform his conduct to the requirements of law.
While the Court has no doubt that the Defendant was well aware of the criminality of his actions, it is the combination of the Defendant's mental health and substance abuse issues along with his upbringing that indicate the Defendant lacked the capacity to conform to the requirements of law. In light of the foregoing, the Court finds that this factor has been proven and accords it moderate weight.
As long as we continue to have a death penalty in Florida, we will see that many of the defendants who sit on death row have backgrounds similar to the history and life of Khadafy Kareem Mullens. While Mullens's multiple traumas, including his numerous adverse childhood experiences, serve as substantial non-statutory mitigation, I cannot disagree with the trial  court's weighing of the aggravating circumstances against the mitigating circumstances, nor with our conclusion that the death sentence in this case was proportional, and agree that this case is dramatically different from Yacob v. State, 136 So. 3d 539, 550-52 (Fla. 2014), a case we reduced to life. Accordingly, I concur in the affirmance of Mullens's conviction and death sentence.
LEWIS, J., specially concurring.
I agree with the conclusions reached by the Court today. However, I write to express my concern that this decision should not in any way be understood to eliminate or undermine the legal procedures regarding the admission of nontestimonial evidence. See Johnson v. State, 660 So. 2d 637, 645 (Fla. 1995) ("The rules of evidence may be relaxed during the penalty phase of a capital trial, but they emphatically are not to be completely ignored."); see also § 921.141(1), Fla. Stat. (2008) ("[T]his subsection shall not be construed to authorize the introduction of any evidence secured in violation of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of Florida.")
Courts in Florida have held that authentication of surveillance footage during the determination of guilt is satisfied upon the testimony of an individual, such as an employee or business owner, who was familiar with the installation and operation of the surveillance equipment. Dragani v. State, 759 So. 2d 745, 746 (Fla. 5th DCA 2000) quashed in part on other grounds, 791 So. 2d 1083 (Fla. 2001); Dolan v. State, 743 So. 2d 544, 546 (Fla. 4th DCA 1999). Additionally, in Wagner v. State, 707 So. 2d 827, 830 (Fla. 1st DCA 1998), the First District held that authentication was satisfied upon testimony from a police officer who installed, operated, and explained the chain of custody of a video camera. However, no court in Florida has concluded that authentication of evidence that proves the guilt of a defendant can be satisfied only upon the testimony of an officer who was familiar with the investigation, but ultimately could not verify the reliability of the recording device. I would caution trial courts against relying on the decision today to support such an evidentiary ruling made outside the context of the sentencing phase of a capital trial.
Rather, the conclusions reached today must be considered in the relatively rare context that this defendant pleaded guilty to a capital offense and waived the right to an advisory sentence by a jury of his peers. Additionally, there were absolutely no allegations that the surveillance footage was materially altered, nor is there any suggestion that law enforcement officers mistakenly identified Mullens after viewing the footage. Many of the evidentiary restrictions in the Florida Evidence Code, including the requirement that evidence must be authenticated before it can be admitted, exist to prevent juror confusion and to guarantee criminal defendants the right to a fair trial. See, e.g., § 90.403, Fla. Stat. (2008) (excluding relevant but unduly prejudicial or confusing evidence); § 90.802, Fla. Stat. (2008) (generally excluding hearsay evidence). When there are no jurors to potentially confuse and the defendant has conceded his or her guilt, relevant, nontestimonial evidence that is not otherwise of questionable origin is admissible during a penalty phase of a capital trial. See § 921.141(1), Fla. Stat.
However, the fact that evidence need only be relevant during the sentencing phase of a capital trial should not be interpreted to mean that trial courts can or should admit evidence that is patently unreliable. The definition of relevant evidence is "evidence tending to prove or disprove a material fact." § 90.401, Fla. Stat.  (2008). Further, authentication is central to the understanding of relevancy:
The authentication requirement may be viewed as an aspect of relevancy. In a contract action, for example, evidence in the form of a writing is relevant as proof of the actual terms of an alleged agreement only if it is shown to be the very document to which the parties somehow manifested their assent, or at least a true copy of that document. In this sense, it is actually [Federal Rule of Evidence] 401 and [Federal Rule of Evidence] 402 that impose the requirement to authenticate, for these provisions define relevancy and make it a condition of admissibility.
Christopher B. Mueller & Laird C. Kirkpatrick, 5 Federal Evidence § 9.2 (4th ed. 2015) (emphasis added). Therefore, it follows that evidence that is obviously unreliable, fabricated, or of unknown origin is necessarily irrelevant.
Accordingly, the proponent of nontestimonial, non-self-authenticating evidence cannot simply proffer for admission such evidence alone to establish its relevancy. For example, this Court has held that in the absence of evidence linking a given weapon to the charged offense, the weapon itself is irrelevant and inadmissible. Agatheas v. State, 77 So. 3d 1232, 1236 (Fla. 2011) (holding that it is insufficient to establish the relevancy of a particular gun by simply introducing it and instead requiring the prosecution to somehow link that gun to the crime). Likewise, the foundation for photographic and videographic evidence can be established either through the testimony of a witness with knowledge under the pictorial testimony theory of admission, or upon additional proof of the reliability of the recording under the silent witness theory. Hannewacker v. City of Jacksonville Beach, 419 So. 2d 308, 311 (Fla. 1982); Bryant v. State, 810 So. 2d 532, 536 (Fla. 1st DCA 2002) (citing Charles W. Ehrhardt, Florida Evidence, § 401.2 at 114 (2001 ed.)); Dolan, 743 So. 2d at 545-46.
In this case, the testimony of Detective Tower—who responded to the crime scene, arrested Mullens after viewing the surveillance footage, and testified after Mullens admitted his guilt—provided a sufficient foundation for the admission of the surveillance footage. I therefore concur in the decision of the Court.
LABARGA, C.J., and PARIENTE, J., concur.
CANADY, J., concurring in result.
I agree with the decision to affirm the convictions and sentences. But I disagree with the conclusion that the "trial court incorrectly applied the law regarding the avoid arrest aggravating circumstance with respect to the murder of Uddin." Majority op. at 22. Contrary to the unelaborated assertion in Garron v. State, 528 So. 2d 353, 360 (Fla. 1988), when a victim is slain while attempting to make a phone call during the course of a robbery, a strong inference arises that the defendant first concluded that the phone call was likely being made to summon the police and then acted against the victim to thwart phone contact with the police and thereby to avoid arrest for the robbery. The imputation of another motive to the defendant in such circumstances can only be produced by a flight of fancy. I also disagree with remanding for a written order on competency, which is an unnecessary and useless act.
POLSTON, J., concurs.

 

