.
Because I disagree with the majority's conclusion that the investigative stop of Mr. Paff's vehicle was not justified by a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity, I dissent.
"[U]nprovoked flight upon noticing the police" is a factor that can be utilized in establishing a reasonable suspicion because it demonstrates "nervous, evasive behavior." Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 124. Such behavior can be exhibited by the driver of a vehicle even when the driver violates no traffic regulation. See United States v. Brignoni-Ponce, 422 U.S. 873, 885, 45 L. Ed. 2d 607, 95 S. Ct. 2574 (1975) ("The [vehicle] driver's behavior may be relevant, as erratic driving or obvious attempts to evade officers can support a reasonable suspicion."); United States v. Juvenile TK, 134 F.3d 899, 903 (8th Cir. 1998) ("[P]olice are entitled to be suspicious of vehicular movement that, while not illegal, may be reasonably perceived as evasive."); see also United States v. Arvizu, 534 U.S. 266, 275-76, 151 L. Ed. 2d 740, 122 S. Ct. 744 (2002) (holding that conduct of vehicle driver was relevant to reasonable suspicion determination and stating that "a driver's slowing down, stiffening of posture, and failure to acknowledge a sighted law enforcement officer" would be "quite unusual" in certain circumstances). 
In the instant case, the officer who effected the stop of Mr. Paff's vehicle testified that, when he approached the service station where Mr. Paff's vehicle was located, "[a]s soon as" Mr. Paff saw the officer he "took off"-that is, Mr. Paff "drove off real quick." The officer's testimony establishes that Mr. Paff's reaction to the officer's appearance at the scene was to make a hasty departure. Considering such a hasty departure triggered by the appearance of the police as an instance of "nervous, evasive behavior" is quite reasonable. Wardlow, 528 U.S. at 124. 
In making his hasty departure, Mr. Paff was not simply "ignor[ing] the police and go[ing] about his business." Id. at 125. As the court made clear in Wardlow, flight from the police is the antithesis of ignoring the police and going about one's business. Id. Indeed, Mr. Paff apparently instantaneously stopped going about whatever business he may have been engaged in with the driver of the vehicle which was "parked side by side, very close, window to window" with Mr. Paff's vehicle. 
This conduct of Mr. Paff, although "not necessarily indicative of wrongdoing," was "certainly suggestive of such." Id. at 124. Mr. Paff's flight, without  more, would not be sufficient to establish the basis for a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity. But in making the necessary "commonsense judgments and inferences about human behavior" that is the basis for a determination that reasonable suspicion exists the detaining officer was entitled to consider Mr. Paff's hasty departure as a relevant factor. Id. at 125. 
In making a determination regarding whether reasonable suspicion exists, "the totality of the circumstances-the whole picture-must be taken into account. Based upon that whole picture the detaining officers must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person stopped of criminal activity." United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 66 L. Ed. 2d 621, 101 S. Ct. 690 (1981). "This process allows officers to draw on their own experience and specialized training to make inferences from and deductions about the cumulative information available to them that 'might well elude an untrained person.' " Arvizu, 534 U.S. at 266 (quoting Cortez, 449 U.S. at 418).
The "cumulative information" available to the detaining officer here supported the officer's conclusion that criminal activity was afoot and that further investigation was warranted. In addition to the hasty departure of Mr. Paff and the driver of the other car, additional factors in the totality of circumstances pointed toward the conclusion that criminal activity was afoot. The area was a high crime area. Indeed, the specific location of Mr. Paff's vehicle was a location at which it was common for drug transactions to take place. The position of the two vehicles, parked in close proximity-with the drivers' windows lined up-is also a factor relevant to the reasonable-suspicion determination. This combination of circumstances established "something more than an 'inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or "hunch." ' " United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 7, 104 L. Ed. 2d 1, 109 S. Ct. 1581 (1989) (quoting Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 27, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868 (1968)). Although each of the relevant circumstances would individually be insufficient to justify an investigative stop, taken together they support the conclusion that the detaining officer had a reasonable suspicion that criminal activity was afoot. 
It is true that there was a possible innocent explanation for Mr. Paff's conduct. "A determination that reasonable suspicion exists, however, need not rule out the possibility of innocent conduct." Arvizu, 534 U.S. at 278. Accordingly, I disagree with the majority's view that the officer's testimony concerning the location of the two cars necessarily negates the conclusion that Mr. Paff's behavior was evasive. The detaining officer testified that someone parked in the area where Mr. Paff was parked "would . . . be obstructing traffic that's coming and going in and out of the parking lot." This testimony was an elaboration on the officer's testimony that Paff was parked in an area that was a "flow-way" through the parking lot and not a "normal place for people to park at all." None of the testimony establishes that the entire flow-way was in fact blocked by the two cars and that they necessarily were required to move in order to make way for the approaching vehicle driven by the officer. It is possible to infer such an explanation for Mr. Paff's departure, but such an inference is not required by the testimony concerning the pertinent circumstances. Moreover, the circumstance of the location of the vehicles in no way provides a necessarily sufficient explanation for the haste of Mr. Paff's departure. In sum, the "possibility of innocent conduct" by Mr. Paff does not mean that the detaining officer's assessment  of the totality of the circumstances-and his resulting suspicion concerning Mr. Paff's conduct-was unwarranted. Id. 
I also differ with the majority's conclusion that Mr. Paff's departure cannot be considered "headlong flight." Headlong means simply "undertaken quickly and suddenly." Random House Unabridged Dictionary 881 (2d ed. 1993). Headlong is synonymous with "hasty." Id. The detaining officer's testimony that Mr. Paff "took off" is sufficient to support the conclusion that he was engaged in headlong flight. 
On the basis of the foregoing analysis, I would uphold the trial court's determination that the investigative stop of Mr. Paff was based on reasonable suspicion and affirm the judgment withholding adjudication for possession of cocaine. 

 

