.
CANADY, J., concurs in result only with an opinion.
Concur by: PARIENTE; CANADY  
Concur




PARIENTE, J., concurring in result only.
Regardless of whether the insurance policy is read as clearly providing coverage as the majority concludes or whether the policy is ambiguous as Justice Canady concludes, the answer to the certified question is in the affirmative. The reason for that alternative answer based on an ambiguity in the policy language is that this Court construes ambiguous provisions in favor of the insured. Rather than deciding this case on the "plain language" as the majority does, I would acknowledge the existence of two reasonable interpretations but then, in accordance with the rules of construction for insurance policies, apply the interpretation in favor of coverage.
As stated by Justice Canady in his separate opinion in this case, this Court follows the rule that "[a]mbiguous coverage provisions are construed strictly against the insurer that drafted the policy and liberally in favor of the insured." Fayad v. Clarendon Nat'l Ins. Co., 899 So. 2d 1082, 1086 (Fla. 2005). If there are two competing reasonable interpretations, one favoring coverage for the insured and one denying coverage for the insured, courts uniformly adopt the interpretation conferring coverage. See Container Corp. of Am. v. Md. Cas. Co., 707 So. 2d 733, 735-36 (Fla. 1998).
The reasoning for this long-established principle is that the insurer, as drafter of the policy language, has an obligation to make the scope of its coverage and any limitations from coverage clear and unambiguous in the actual language of the policy. As we recently stated in United States Fire Insurance Co. v. J.S.U.B., Inc., 979 So. 2d 871, 884 (Fla. 2007), if the insurer "intended to preclude coverage based on the cause of action asserted, it was incumbent on [the insurer] to include clear language to accomplish this result."
The insurer in this case has contended that the wording of the policy provides coverage for situations where the content  of the material--and not the act of sending it--violates a person's right of privacy. While that is one reasonable interpretation of the policy, it is not the only reasonable interpretation. I agree with the rationale of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in interpreting New Jersey law on the same policy provisions defining advertising injury:
Although we are aware that "[a]n insurance policy is not ambiguous merely because two conflicting interpretations of it are suggested by the litigants," in evaluating the ambiguity of the phrase, we cannot ignore the body of national case law addressing the same or similar policy language and falling on both sides of this interpretive ledger. It is fair to say that even the most sophisticated and informed insurance consumer would be confused as to the boundaries of advertising injury coverage in light of the deep difference of opinion symbolized in these cases.
Terra Nova Ins. Co. v. Fray-Witzer, 449 Mass. 406, 869 N.E.2d 565, 573 (Mass. 2007) (citation and footnote omitted) (quoting Powell v. Alemaz, Inc., 335 N.J. Super. 33, 760 A.2d 1141, 1147 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2000)). The ambiguity, in my view, arises because the policy language is unclear as to whether the phrase "violates a person's right of privacy" refers to the publication of the material or the material itself.
The bottom line is that if the insurer, as the drafter of the language, intended to limit coverage to material whose content violated the right of privacy, then it could have easily done so by simply adding a phrase as follows: Oral or written publication of material, the content of which violates the right of privacy. Transportation Insurance Company did not do so and thus left the policy open to a reasonable interpretation in favor of coverage. See Terra Nova, 869 N.E.2d at 574 ("[H]ad [the insurers] wished their policies to pertain only to violations of privacy created by the content of material, it was incumbent on them to draft explicit policies to that effect.").
For all of these reasons, I agree with the majority's conclusion that insurance coverage should be extended and agree with answering the certified question in the affirmative.
CANADY, J., concurs.
CANADY, J., concurring in result only.
Although I agree that the certified question should be answered in the affirmative, I do not concur in the majority's conclusion that the policy provisions at issue are unambiguous. Instead, I conclude that the resolution of the question presented by this case is dictated by the rule that "[a]mbiguous coverage provisions are construed strictly against the insurer that drafted the policy and liberally in favor of the insured." Fayad v. Clarendon Nat'l Ins. Co., 899 So. 2d 1082, 1086 (Fla. 2005).
The clause at issue provides coverage for advertising injuries arising from "[o]ral or written publication of material that violates a person's right of privacy." An ordinary reader of this clause would reasonably be in doubt concerning whether the violations covered by the clause must be based on the informational content of the material that is published or may be based on the physical intrusion of the material.
The existence of two different senses in which the noun "material" is commonly used contributes to the ambiguity. One sense of "material" denotes a physical object: "[t]he matter of which a thing is or may be made." 1 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 1723 (6th ed.). This sense of the term has nothing to do with informational content. Another sense of "material"  is used to identify "[i]nformation, evidence, ideas, etc., for use in writing a book or script, drawing a conclusion, etc." Id. at 1724. This sense of the term has everything to do with informational content.
The ambiguity is compounded by the existence of two senses in which the noun "publication" is commonly used. "[P]ublication" may denote "[t]he action of making something generally known"--a definition which points to informational content. 2 Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 2395 (6th ed.). The term also may denote "[t]he process of producing and issuing . . . printed or reproduced matter"-- a definition which focuses on the physical object disseminated. Id.
When reference is made to a "written publication of material that violates a person's right of privacy," an ordinary reader will not--unless sufficient contextual clues are present--understand with certainty whether the reference is to a violation caused by the intrusion of the writing as a physical object, by the informational content of the writing, or by either. The relevant context here does not provide an ordinary reader with a sufficient basis for rejecting the reasonable possibility that "written publication of material" denotes the physical object received when a fax transmission is disseminated and that the policy therefore covers privacy violations based on the intrusion of such a physical object. Neither does the context provide adequate grounds for rejecting as unreasonable a reading which limits the meaning of "written publication of material" to information or ideas--that is, to the informational content that is published and causes a privacy violation.
Given the different relevant senses in which "material" and "publication" are commonly used and the lack of a sufficient contextual basis to guide the ordinary reader to an unequivocal meaning of the policy provision, the plain meaning rule does not provide a persuasive basis for deciding the question presented here. Since the reading of the policy advocated by Penzer, the insured, is not a reading that an ordinary reader would reject as unreasonable, Penzer's reading must prevail.

 

