 in result with an opinion.
Concur by: LAWSON; CANADY  
Concur




LAWSON, J., concurring specially.
While I fully agree with the majority's decision to affirm the order of the Commission in this case, I would apply slightly different reasoning.
Sierra Club urges us to reject the Commission's approval of the settlement at issue here because the Commission did not make an express finding that FPL's sizable investment in new peaker units was prudent. The majority properly declines this invitation and reaffirms that the Commission is not required to make findings on all issues in a rate case in order to approve a settlement as "in the public interest." Citizens of State of Fla. v. Fla. Pub. Serv. Comm'n, 146 So. 3d 1143, 1150, 1153 (Fla. 2014).
The majority also properly recognizes that "the prudence of large capital investments is a relevant consideration in the Commission's review of a settlement under its public interest standard because imprudent investments of millions of dollars would likely clash with a public interest finding." Majority op. at 18. Even though the prudence of large capital investments is generally a relevant consideration, it is a matter of common sense that the Commission could look at all of the evidence presented in a case, consider the arguments of all parties, and determine the agreed rates to be "fair, just, and reasonable" and the settlement in the public interest, see Citizens, 146 So. 3d at 1153, without deciding each issue presented. For example, if the evidence were undisputed that most of the  costs sought to be recovered were prudent investments, and that the agreed rates would be fair, just, and reasonable irrespective of the Commission's factual determination as to most or all of the disputed costs or other minor issues, the Commission could easily approve the settlement by broadly finding it to be in the public interest, without resolving any of the individual issues identified by the parties as disputed. That is the case here, where the Commission found that FPL provides "excellent service" to its customers at rates that rank "among the lowest in the country" and lower than any other electric utility company operating in Florida.15  Conversely, it seems equally obvious that a case could be presented with disputed cost elements large enough in relation to new rates agreed upon in a settlement that it would be impossible for the Commission to determine whether the rates were fair, just, and reasonable without first determining the prudence of that particular investment.
Given this Court's appropriate deference to the Commission's factual findings, see Citizens, 146 So. 3d at 1149 ("[W]hen reviewing an order of the Commission, this Court affords great deference to the Commission's findings."), and exercises of judgment, see W. Fla. Elec. Coop. Ass'n v. Jacobs, 887 So. 2d 1200, 1204 (Fla. 2004) ("Commission orders come to this Court clothed with the presumption that they are reasonable and just."), and the general rule that factual findings are not required on all issues, Citizens, 146 So. 3d at 1150, 1153, I would think that any party challenging the Commission's approval of a settlement on grounds that the Commission failed to make certain findings would necessarily have to convincingly show (1) a genuine factual dispute, apparent from the record, as to the issue, and (2) that the issue is of sufficient magnitude that its resolution would be required before the reasonableness of the agreed rates could be demonstrated or determined. I agree that an affirmance is appropriate in this case because Sierra Club did not make either showing.16 
 As for the first necessary showing, Sierra Club has not demonstrated any basis, from this record, to question the prudence of the peaker investment. FPL laid out a compelling case that the investment was necessary for continued system reliability and was the most cost-effective option available to provide that necessary reliability. According to the testimony, although the Peaker Project's costs were responsible for $92 million of FPL's 2017 base rate increase request (of $866 million), the project will save customers $203 million in fuel costs and other expenses over the operating life of the units—while also significantly reducing air emissions. This evidence establishes FPL's case for prudence, and no other party presented evidence undermining FPL's case. Sierra Club did cross-examine an FPL witness regarding whether the demand could be met with solar cells or batteries (for electricity storage). But, the evidence demonstrates that solar cells cannot be relied upon to meet peak or emergency demand and that batteries would not have been cost-effective.
Because Sierra Club has failed to demonstrate a genuine factual dispute as to the prudence of the peaker investment, there is no need to consider the second showing that would appear to be necessary to cast doubt on the Commission's public interest finding: that the peaker investment was so large in comparison to the other, uncontested costs for which FPL sought recovery that the reasonableness of the agreed rate increase could not be determined without a prudence finding on the peaker issue. Nor did Sierra Club attempt to make this second showing.17 
For these reasons, I would affirm the Commission's approval of the settlement agreement.
By contrast, the majority's rejection of Sierra Club's argument appears to be premised in part on an assertion that requiring findings on any issue would require findings on all issues and unnecessarily expand the length of the Commission's orders. Majority op. at 19 ("A requirement for the Commission to address the Peaker Project individually would correspondingly demand that the Commission also address the remaining 166 issues in the same manner. This command would convert a short order into a boundless tome, despite the fact that the  Commission found the settlement agreement to be in the public interest . . . ."). For the reasons explained above, I disagree with the assertion that requiring findings on one issue in a settled case would necessarily mean that findings were required on all issues before the settlement could be approved. Moreover, employing the analysis suggested above would allow the majority to avoid the circular reasoning inherent in rejecting Sierra Club's argument that the public interest cannot be determined without a prudence finding on the peaker units by simply asserting that "the Commission found the settlement agreement to be in the public interest." Majority op. at 19.
CANADY, J., concurring in result.
I agree with Justice Lawson that the "Sierra Club has not demonstrated any basis, from this record, to question the prudence of the peaker investment." Specially concurring op. at 31. Indeed, there is competent, substantial evidence in the record supporting a conclusion that the peaker investment was a prudent investment. This is a sufficient ground for rejecting the Sierra Club's challenge to the approval of the settlement agreement and affirming the final order of the PSC, which determined "that the Settlement Agreement establishes rates that are fair, just, and reasonable and is in the public interest." Majority op. at 7.

 

