.
I dissent from the majority's conclusion that the admission of the tape-recorded statements at trial requires the reversal of Smith's convictions. Because I conclude that the crucial portions of the recorded statements were admissible as statements of identification under section 90.801(2)(c) and that any error with respect to the admission of other portions of the recorded statements was not harmful, I would affirm Smith's convictions. 
As the majority apparently acknowledges, it is well-established that "section 90.801(2)(c) applies regardless of whether the declarant identifies the individual in court. The failure of the witness to repeat the identification in court does not affect the admissibility of evidence of the prior identification." Ehrhardt, Florida Evidence § 801.9; see also  Brown, 413 So. 2d at 416 ("It appears the jury could have believed the prior identification, despite the in-court doubts and denials.");  United States v. Shryock, 342 F.3d 948, 982 (9th Cir. 2003) (holding that "prior identification of [defendant] was admissible nonhearsay" where witness denied identification at trial). A prior statement of identification is thus admissible under section 90.801(2)(c) as substantive evidence to refute the testimony of witnesses who have changed their story at trial. 
Notwithstanding the admissibility of out-of-court statements of identification made by a witness testifying at trial, the majority has concluded that Smith's convictions-which rest on such statements of identification-must be reversed. The majority bases the reversal of Smith's conviction on its conclusion that "accusatory statements in the form of a narrative are not admissible into evidence pursuant to section 90.801(2)(c)." In support of this conclusion, the majority observes that the State's position in support of the admission of the tape-recorded statements "would seriously erode the rule that a witness's prior inconsistent statements are admissible  for impeachment purposes and not as substantive evidence." The majority further states that the admission of such evidence would "infringe the defendant's [constitutional] right to confront adverse witnesses."
The majority also apparently takes the view that testimony relating to the "statements that concerned the recanting witnesses' selection of Smith's photograph from the photopack" could have been properly introduced under section 90.801(2)(c). In connection with this, the majority expresses no opinion regarding whether the "limited segments of the tape-recorded statements" regarding the identification of Smith from his photograph might properly have been played for the jury but observes that "the better practice would [be] to lay a proper foundation under section 90.801(2)(c) and elicit testimony from [the detective who conducted the taped interviews] about the out-of-court identifications." 
The majority opinion, in my view, places unreasonable limitations on the admission of evidence that is highly relevant and probative and that is specifically made admissible under section 90.801(2)(c). From the majority's opinion, we know that too much "narrative" was presented to the jury, but we do not know precisely what portions of the statements constituted admissible statements of identification. Although the precise parameters of the limitations on statements of identification are not made clear by the majority,  the majority opinion manifests an unmistakable inclination to minimize the admission of evidence pursuant to section 90.801(2)(c).
 The Admissibility of Tape-Recorded Statements
The majority's unduly restrictive approach is illustrated by its statement-admittedly in dicta-that the better practice would be not to play even the portions of the audiotapes containing statements that would properly be admissible under section 90.801(2)(c). There is no reason, however, that the admissible portions of a properly authenticated tape should not be played for the jury. See  Odom v. State, 403 So. 2d 936, 940 (Fla. 1992). Adequate safeguards can be established by the trial court to ensure that the inadmissible portions of such a tape are not presented to the jury. The jury should not ordinarily be denied direct access to admissible out-of-court statements of identification which have been tape recorded. See  Kendall v. State, 790 N.E.2d 122 (Ind. Ct. App. 2003) (holding that trial court did not err in permitting playing of taped out-of-court statement of witness identifying defendant as perpetrator-as substantive evidence-when witness gave inconsistent testimony at trial);  State v. Reaves, 130 Ohio App. 3d 776, 721 N.E.2d 424, 430 (Ohio Ct. App. 1st 1998) (holding that recanting witness's "taped statements of identification were properly admitted as substantive evidence"); cf.  Cooper v. State, 856 So. 2d 969, 980 (Fla. 2003) (holding that admission of audiotape recording of 911 call was proper). 
A tape recording of the words uttered by a declarant can undoubtedly be powerful evidence. But that-without more-is hardly a reason to exclude the tape recording. Absent a showing pursuant to section 90.403 that the "probative value" of such evidence "is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice," the rules of evidence do not permit the exclusion of such evidence. Here, there is nothing suggesting that there is any danger of unfair prejudice to Smith from the admission of the admissible portions of the audiotapes. 
The Scope of Statements of Identification Under Section 90.801(2)(c)
For the identification of a person to have any practical significance and legal relevance,  the identification must be correlated with some specific conduct of the person identified. The majority's conclusion that "accusatory statements in the form of a narrative" are inadmissible as statements of identification does not take into account the reality that a statement of identification will necessarily consist of some narrative concerning the conduct of the person identified and ordinarily-at least in criminal cases-have an accusatory character. 
These are typical simple statements of identification: "That's the man who shot me." "The person in the photograph is the person who robbed the bank." These illustrative simple statements of identification demonstrate that any statement of identification necessarily involves some description-a narrative-of the identified person's conduct. They also demonstrate that such statements can have an unmistakable accusatory character. A reasonable interpretation of section 90.801(2)(c) requires that the permissible scope of the content of a statement of identification be broad enough to establish the practical significance and legal relevance of the out-of-court identification. Labeling a statement as an accusatory narrative does nothing to further the analysis that is required under the statute. 
I acknowledge that in A.E.B. this court drew a distinction between properly admitted prior statement of identification and inadmissible hearsay "accusatory statements" made by a witness to an investigating officer.  818 So. 2d at 536. In determining that the admission of those "accusatory statements" required reversal of the conviction, the A.E.B. court relied on  Caruso v. State, 645 So. 2d 389, 394 (Fla. 1994), a case which does not address the admission of statements of identification pursuant to section 90.801(2)(c). A.E.B. did not, however, describe the content of the "accusatory statements" that required reversal. The court did not discuss how those inadmissible statements related to-or did not relate to-the properly admitted statement of identification. A.E.B. thus affords no guidance on the proper scope of a statement of identification under section 90.801(2)(c). 
Other courts have acknowledged that an identification must be placed in context in order for it to have meaning and that some description of the conduct of the identified person is permissible. The court in  Johnson v. United States, 820 A.2d 551, 559 n.4 (D.C. Ct. App. 2003), recognized that for a prior out-of-court statement of identification "to be understandable and therefore probative, [the] identification must have context." In Johnson, the court held that a recanting witness's transcribed, prior statement identifying the gunmen and describing the shooting was properly admissible as a nonhearsay statement of identification.  Porter v. United States, 826 A.2d 398, 410 (D.C. Ct. App. 2003), held that when a witness has made a prior out-of-court statement of identification an account of [the witness's] description of the offense itself is admissible only to the extent necessary to make the identification understandable to the jury." The Porter court stated that although "there were instances when the witness exceeded the permissible bounds [in] recounting details of [the victim's] account of the offense unnecessary to make the identification understandable," nonetheless "much of the story came in properly to identify [the defendant] as the person who committed a particular criminal act."  826 A.2d at 410, 411. See also  Brown v. United States, 840 A.2d 82 (D.C. Ct. App. 2004) (holding that various out-of-court statements of witness describing defendant's conduct were properly admissible as nonhearsay statements of identification). 
 In the instant case, the tape-recorded statements of the recanting witnesses admittedly contained details that went beyond what was necessary to establish the context for their identification of Smith. But Smith's conviction should be reversed on the basis of any error of the trial court in admitting portions of the tape-recorded statements other than the actual statements of identification only if that error was properly preserved and was harmful. To determine whether the improper admission of portions of the tape-recorded statements was harmful error, it is necessary to identify the portions of the statements that were properly admitted. See  DiGuilio, 491 So. 2d at 1135.
Before reviewing the details of the tape-recorded statements, it should be noted that each of the tape-recorded statements included the identification of Troy from a photograph in a photopack presented by the detective conducting the interview. 6  The fact that the statements of identification did involve the identification of Troy from a photograph removes this case from the category of cases where the alleged perpetrator of the crime is identified by name to the police without the use of a photograph or in-person identification. In this case, we therefore need not address the issue of whether such statements of identification made without the use of a photograph or in-person identification are properly admissible under section 90.801(2)(c) as statements "of identification of a person made after perceiving the person." Compare  Liscinsky v. State, 700 So. 2d 171 (Fla. 4th DCA 1997), with  Stanford v. State, 576 So. 2d 737 (Fla. 4th DCA 1991).
 The Statements Identifying Smith 7 
In the recording of Chad Moreland's statement, after recounting the time and place of the incident "where somebody got shot," Moreland stated that "Troy" shot a shotgun once at a truck, after which the truck slowed down, swerved, hit a stop sign, and went into the bushes. Moreland's statement also included details about the sequence of events that occurred prior to the shooting, as well as what "Troy" did and said after he fired the shot. Among other things, Moreland's statement indicated that after the shooting "Troy" said something like, "I just killed that cracker," or "I just killed him." Moreland identified Troy from a photopack-"without a doubt in [his] mind"-as the individual who had fired the shot. 
In Iris Moreland's recorded statement, the time and location of the incident in question were established and Ms. Moreland stated that she heard two gun shots and then saw "them come running through the path . . . Troy with the gun." She further stated that Troy "hollered, 'I killed that cracker.' " Ms. Moreland went on to relate the sequence of events that occurred subsequently. At the conclusion of the taped interview, Ms. Moreland identified Troy from a photograph in a photopack.
 The third taped statement played for the jury was given by Jason Kafus. After establishing the relevant time and place, Kafus recounted what he had been doing prior to the shooting incident. He then described the entry of the victim's truck into the neighborhood where the shooting occurred. He related additional circumstances and events that preceded the shooting. Kafus then stated, "Troy fired the gun." He went on to describe the aftermath of the shooting. Kafus stated that Troy "started goin' crazy. . [. .] 'Somebody shoot me.' . . . Yeah, he kept tellin' me again like, 'Somebody shoot we [sic] . . [. .]' He want [sic] somebody to kill him. An [sic], 'Oh I shot him.' He like cryin' and stuff. . . . He said, 'Oh, I shot the man. Oh, I shot the man[,]'[] you know." Kafus related additional details of what occurred after the shooting, including the content of his discussions with others concerning the incident and comments he had heard about the incident. As with the other two interviews, this interview was concluded with the presentation of a photopack. Kafus identified a photograph of Troy as the shooter. 
In the tape-recorded statements played for the jury at trial, the portions of the recordings containing statements of the witnesses establishing the time and place of the incident and the fact that Troy-who was identified from a photograph by each witness-had shot the gun at the truck in which the victim was located were admissible as statements of identification under section 90.801(2)(c). In addition, the statements relating that Troy said "I killed that cracker" (or other words to that effect) while departing the scene with a gun in hand would similarly be admissible as statements of identification. The latter statements-even without the direct identification of Troy as the shooter-would be highly probative regarding the identity of the shooter. Those statements related to conduct of the identified person so closely tied to the alleged criminal act at issue that it is reasonable also to admit them as part of the statements of identification.
 These crucial portions of the recorded statements-identifying Troy as the shooter and as the person who left the scene carrying a gun and exclaiming, "I killed that cracker"-were necessary to give meaning to the identification of the photograph of the person known to the witnesses as Troy. Their admission into evidence was proper under section 90.801(2)(c).
 Impeachment Evidence and Harmless Error Review
While I concede that the trial court erred in admitting as substantive evidence the other portions of the tape-recorded statements that were inconsistent with the trial testimony, those portions were nonetheless admissible-subject to a proper limiting instruction-under section 90.608(1) to impeach the in-court testimony of the recanting witnesses. Although the trial court's failure to give a proper limiting instruction was an error, I would conclude that there is "no reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction."  DiGuilio, 491 So. 2d at 1135. 
The transcript of the trial makes clear beyond any doubt that the success of Smith's defense hinged on whether the jury believed the version of events contained in the tape-recorded statements of identification which were properly admitted as substantive evidence, or instead believed the testimony given by the recanting witnesses at trial. "An examination of the entire record . . . including a close examination of the permissible evidence on which the jury could have legitimately relied[] and in addition an even closer examination of the impermissible evidence which might possibly have influenced the  jury verdict" leads to the conclusion that the admission of the portions of the tape-recorded statements beyond the scope of the statements of identification was not harmful error. Id. 
There is no reason to believe that anything in the portions of the tape-recorded statements that were inadmissible under section 90.801(2)(c) influenced the jury to assign a level of credibility to the statements of identification that would have been lacking if those portions had been properly introduced for impeachment subject to a limiting instruction. The full tape-recorded statements simply provide additional details concerning what transpired before and after the shooting. They do not add any particular details that strengthen the probative force of the properly admitted statements of identification. Nor do they add any details that cast Smith in a negative light. 
The permissible evidence here included three unequivocal and highly probative statements linking Troy directly to the shooting. The impermissible evidence-which was only impermissible to the extent it was not introduced subject to a proper limiting instruction-consisted of incidental information about the shooting's prelude and aftermath. All of this points to the conclusion that, beyond a reasonable doubt, the verdict reached by the jury would have been no different if the portions of the tape recordings not admissible as substantive evidence had been subjected to a proper limiting instruction. There is simply no basis for concluding that there is a reasonable possibility that the jury's verdict was influenced by the purely incidental information that was admitted without a proper limiting instruction. 
The majority's opinion cites nothing in the portions of the tape-recorded statements not admissible under section 90.801(2)(c) that specifically bolsters the actual statements of identification or that would have otherwise influenced the jury to reach a guilty verdict. Indeed, the majority's harmless error analysis erroneously assumes that no portion of the recorded statements should have been admitted either as substantive evidence or for impeachment of inconsistent trial testimony. That assumption leads the majority to ignore "permissible evidence on which the jury could have legitimately relied." Id.
 Statements of Identification as Substantive Evidence
The majority makes the point that the State's view of section 90.801(2)(c) would "seriously erode the rule that a witness's prior inconsistent statements are admissible for impeachment purposes only and not as substantive evidence." This is a curious point that the majority supports by the citation of decisions-Delgado-Santos and Ivery-which do not address section 90.801(2)(c). The problem with the State's position is not that it would erode the general rule that a witness's prior inconsistent statements are admissible for impeachment purposes only but that it would stretch the admission of substantive evidence under section 90.801(2)(c) beyond what can reasonably be considered a statement of identification. 
Whatever one may think of the policy underlying section 90.801(2)(c), the unmistakable point of that policy is to supplant-not merely erode-the rule limiting the admission of inconsistent out-of-court statements as substantive evidence when the declarant testifies at the relevant trial or hearing and the out-of-court statement is "one of identification of a person made after perceiving the person." § 90.801(2)(c). See  Dep't of Health & Rehabilitative Servs. v. M.B., 701 So. 2d 1155, 1161-62 (1997) ("Under section 90.801(2)(c) . . . [an] out-of-court statement of identification is considered non[]hearsay and,  thus, 'is admissible in court to prove the truth of the matter asserted, e.g., to prove that the person identified was the person who committed the act.' Charles W. Ehrhardt, Florida Evidence § 801.9, at 592 (1996).") 8  . Our task in interpreting the statute is to understand the proper scope of the statements of identification that are admissible under the statute. It is not, as the majority appears to suggest, somehow to limit the impact of the statute on a rule the statute was designed to supercede within the sphere of the statute's operation.
 Confrontation Rights
The majority also suggests that the admission of the tape-recorded statements violated Smith's rights under the Confrontation Clauses of the Florida and United States Constitutions. But  United States v. Owens, 484 U.S. 554, 560, 98 L. Ed. 2d 951, 108 S. Ct. 838 (1988), held that the requirements of the Confrontation Clauses are satisfied with respect to an out-of-court statement of identification whenever the "declarant is present at trial and subject to unrestricted cross-examination." In  A.E.B., 818 So. 2d at 536, we followed Owens and held that a defendant's "constitutional right of confrontation was not implicated . . . because [the declarant of an out-of-court identification] was present at trial and subject to cross-examination." The majority does not explain how its suggestion that the admission of the tape-recorded statements infringed Smith's right to confront adverse witnesses can be squared with the United States Supreme Court's decision in Owens and our decision in A.E.B.
In the instant case, the three witnesses whose out-of-court statements of identification were introduced into evidence each testified at trial and were subjected to cross-examination. The fact that they recanted their out-of-court statements does not change the Confrontation Clause analysis. This is true if the witnesses' failure to confirm the earlier identification is the result of a failed memory. See  Owens, 484 U.S. 554, 98 L. Ed. 2d 951, 108 S. Ct. 838, and  A.E.B., 818 So. 2d 534. It is also true if the witness simply repudiates or denies the prior identification. Whatever the reason for the inconsistency between a declarant's prior statement of identification and that declarant's trial testimony, the defendant's right to confront witnesses is protected by the availability of the declarant for cross-examination at trial.
 Conclusion
In sum, I conclude that under a fair reading of section 90.801(2)(c) the crucial statements establishing Smith's identity as the perpetrator of the crimes for which he was convicted were properly admissible as substantive evidence and that the error related to the admission of the other portions of the tape-recorded statements was harmless. I therefore would affirm Smith's convictions.  

 

