 in result.
I agree with the majority's conclusion that the "Petitioner's failure to comply with the email formatting requirements" of Florida Rule of Judicial Administration 2.516 is not a basis for determining the settlement proposal to be invalid. Majority op. at 17. But I disagree with the majority's holding that proposals for settlement are not subject to the email service requirement of rule 2.516. Majority op. at 15. So I would adopt the Third District's view of the interpretation of rule 2.516 but reject its conclusion that the settlement offer was invalid.
The adoption of rule 2.516 was the culmination of an effort to develop "a comprehensive proposal to implement e-mail service in Florida." In re Amendments to Fla. Rules of Judicial Admin., Fla. Rules of Civil Procedure, Fla. Rules of Criminal Procedure, Fla. Prob. Rules, Fla. Rules of Traffic Court, Fla. Small Claims Rules, Fla. Rules of Juvenile Procedure, Fla. Rules of Appellate Procedure, Fla. Family Law Rules of Procedure—E-Mail Serv. Rule, 102 So. 3d 505, 506 (Fla. 2012) (emphasis added). In adopting rule 2.516, we acknowledged that it "was modeled after" the then-existing Florida Rule of Civil Procedure 1.080. Id. at 507. And we stated unequivocally that "new rule 2.516 provides that all documents required or permitted to be served on another party must be served by e-mail." Id. (emphasis added). Nothing in the history, context, or structure of the rule suggests that the unqualified reference in the text of subdivision (b) to "[a]ll documents required or permitted to be served" is intended to include only documents that are filed. Fla. R. Jud. Admin. 2.516(b)(1) (emphasis added).
Subdivision (a) of rule 2.516 contains general provisions concerning the requirements for service of pleadings and other documents that are "filed in any court proceeding." Fla. R. Jud. Admin. 2.516(a). The scope of subdivision (a) is thus limited to court filings. But that does not mean that the scope of subdivision (b) is similarly limited. Subdivision (a) simply does not address documents that are not filed. Subdivision (b), by its express terms, specifies how service must be made whenever "service is required or permitted to be made." Fla. R. Jud. Admin. 2.516(b). By its plain language, the scope of subdivision (b) necessarily extends beyond documents that are filed in court proceedings to include documents that are served but not filed.
The majority errs in relying on the reference in Florida Rule of Civil Procedure 1.442(c)(2)(G) to "a certificate of service in the form required by rule 1.080." Majority op. at 13. Since the adoption of rule 2.516 in 2012, rule 1.080 has not contained a form certificate of service. With the adoption of rule 2.516 the form certificate of service was moved to the new rule, where it is set forth in subdivision (f). So the reference on which the majority relies is an obsolete, erroneous reference to a superseded version of rule 1.080—a nonsensical reference that can only be treated as meaningless. It can certainly provide no guidance for interpreting the scope of rule 2.516(b), much less a basis for disregarding the plain language of that rule.
LAWSON, J., concurs.

 

