.
Because I conclude that the conduct of the police in responding to the reported emergency was reasonable and that the trial court therefore correctly denied the motion to suppress, I would affirm Wheeler's convictions.
As the majority opinion recounts, the trial court specifically found (a) that the deputies were dispatched "pursuant to a 911 telephone call" and (b) that Wheeler "attempted to flee back in[to] the residence and did not cooperate with the officers." In my view, these crucial findings are supported by the record and together with the other pertinent findings provide an adequate basis for the trial court's denial of the motion to suppress.
I thus disagree with the majority's conclusion that the trial court's "determination that the dispatch was based on a 911 call is not supported by the record." At the suppression hearing, after testimony had been given by one of the deputies concerning the report that the perpetrator had taken the victim of the assault inside the home, defense counsel began the subsequent question to the deputy as follows: "Well, that's what some anonymous caller had told [the] 9-1-1 operator, correct?" Defense counsel finished the question by elaborating on the content of the anonymous call. The deputy then answered, "Correct." Later in questioning the same deputy, defense counsel made reference to "this 9-1-1 call." In its argument to the trial court, the State specifically focused on the circumstance that the deputies were responding to a 911 call. The defense has never asserted--either before the trial court or in this appeal--that the basis for the dispatch was anything other than a 911 call.
"[A]ppellate courts [must] accord a presumption of correctness to the trial court's rulings on motions to suppress with regard to the trial court's determination of historical facts." Connor v. State, 803 So. 2d 598, 608 (Fla. 2001). A "reviewing court is bound by the trial court's factual findings if they are supported by competent, substantial evidence." Pagan v. State, 830 So. 2d 792, 806 (Fla. 2002). "[T]he reviewing court must interpret the evidence and reasonable inferences and deductions derived therefrom in a manner most favorable to sustaining the trial court's ruling." Id.
Given this standard of review, I would sustain the trial court's finding of historical fact that the deputies were dispatched "pursuant to a 911 telephone call." The testifying deputy's affirmative response to defense counsel's question concerning "what some anonymous caller had told [the] 9-1-1 operator" provided a sufficient basis for the trial court's finding of fact.
In light of the factual context determined to exist by the trial court, I would hold that there was "an objectively reasonable basis . . . for the [police] to believe that there [was] an immediate need for police assistance for the protection of life." Seibert, 923 So. 2d at 468. Based on the information provided to them from the 911 calls reporting that an assault was in progress and that the female victim "had been taken inside by [the] male suspect who had been hitting her," the deputies were justified in detaining Wheeler when he proved unwilling to cooperate with their investigation. See United States v. Crapser, 472 F.3d 1141, 1148 (9th Cir. 2007) (holding "that when a suspect voluntarily opens the door of his residence in response to a non-coercive [sic] 'knock and talk' request, the police may temporarily seize the suspect outside the home (or at the threshold) provided that they have reasonable suspicion of criminal activity"). Wheeler's refusal to cooperate with the deputies provided further objective grounds for a belief  by the deputies that evil was afoot, that the victim of the reported assault was in immediate need of assistance, and that entry of the house was necessary to provide that assistance. Given the totality of the circumstances with which they were confronted, the police were justified in concluding that "safety [was] threatened and time [was] of the essence." Riggs, 918 So. 2d at 279.
In J.L., 529 U.S. at 273, although holding that an anonymous tip failed to provide a sufficient basis for an investigatory stop, the Court nonetheless recognized the potential existence of "circumstances under which the danger alleged in an anonymous tip might be so great as to justify a search even without a showing of reliability." In my view, the instant case presents such circumstances.
In United States v. Holloway, 290 F.3d 1331, 1334 (11th Cir. 2002), the Eleventh Circuit considered "whether law enforcement officials may conduct a warrantless search of a private residence in response to an emergency situation reported by an anonymous 911 caller." The Holloway court recognized that "911 calls are the predominant means of communicating emergency situations" and that "[i]f law enforcement could not rely on information conveyed by anonymous 911 callers, their ability to respond effectively to emergency situations would be significantly curtailed." Id. at 1339. The court concluded that "when an emergency is reported by an anonymous caller, the need for immediate action may outweigh the need to verify the reliability of the caller." Id.
In Holloway, the court specifically considered circumstances where officers received "a dispatch from a 911 operator relaying [an anonymous] report of gunshots and arguing at [the defendant's] address," followed by a "second dispatch indicating continued gunshots and arguing." Id. at 1338. When the officers arrived at the defendant's dwelling, "nothing at the [scene] dissuaded the officers from believing the veracity of the 911 calls." Id. The court held that the officers acted reasonably in searching the defendant's house: "Under the circumstances known to them at that time, the officers reasonably believed an emergency situation justified a warrantless search of [the defendant's] home for victims of gunfire. The possibility of a gunshot victim lying prostrate in the dwelling created an exigency necessitating immediate search." Id.
Other courts have also held that an anonymous 911 report of a grave threat to safety can provide the basis for the entry of a home, see State v. Torres, 201 Ore. App. 275, 118 P.3d 268 (Or. Ct. App. 2005); see also People v. DePaula, 179 A.D.2d 424, 579 N.Y.S.2d 10 (N.Y. App. Div. 1992); State v. Boggess, 115 Wis. 2d 443, 340 N.W.2d 516 (Wis. 1983); or an investigatory detention, see People v. Dolly, 40 Cal. 4th 458, 53 Cal. Rptr. 3d 803, 150 P.3d 693 (Cal. 2007); State v. Prendergast, 103 Haw. 451, 83 P.3d 714 (Haw. 2004); State v. Golotta, 178 N.J. 205, 837 A.2d 359 (N.J. 2003). 5  
 Here, the police had information which they could reasonably credit as a contemporaneous, eyewitness account of events pointing to the existence of a potentially grave threat to the physical safety of the reported victim. When Wheeler refused to cooperate with the investigation undertaken by the deputies, the deputies' reasonable fear for the safety of the reported victim was understandably heightened. The deputies were not constitutionally required to slink away as Wheeler slammed the door in their faces. Based on the historical facts determined by the trial court, I cannot conclude that the deputies at any point acted other than reasonably. As in Holloway, the objectively reasonable prospect of a "victim lying prostrate in the dwelling" justified the warrantless search of the dwelling. 290 F.3d at 1338. I therefore dissent from the majority's conclusion that the deputies violated the Fourth Amendment.

 

