
Modification of a final sentence requires express congressional authorization. The majority's decision sidesteps this statutory imperative and instead reasons that district courts are free—and here, required—to modify final sentences unless specifically prohibited from doing so. Congress enacted Section 404 of the First Step Act to retroactively reduce disparities between the crack and powder cocaine sentencing schemes; the statute is silent about other changes to a defendant's final sentence. The majority finds in this silence an implicit grant of authority to retroactively correct Sentencing Guidelines errors based on intervening law, an authority this Court has rejected in the context of collateral challenges to final sentences. I would instead conclude that 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(B) authorizes only the modification "expressly permitted" by the First  Step Act, which does not include reevaluating a defendant's career-offender Guidelines designation in light of a post-sentencing change in the law.
I.
A sentence of imprisonment "constitutes a final judgment." 18 U.S.C. § 3582(b). A court "may not modify a term of imprisonment once it has been imposed," except in narrow circumstances. 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c). As relevant here, a court "may modify an imposed term of imprisonment to the extent otherwise expressly permitted by statute or by Rule 35 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure." 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(B).
Section 404 of the First Step Act expressly permits a district court that imposed a sentence for a covered offense to "impose a reduced sentence as if sections 2 and 3 of the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 . . . were in effect at the time the covered offense was committed." First Step Act § 404(b). This provision permits a district court to reduce a final sentence to account for the statutory changes wrought by Sections 2 and 3 of the Fair Sentencing Act. It does not expressly permit a district court to reduce a sentence based on any other intervening changes in the law.
The "narrow exception to finality provided by § 3582(c)(1)(B)," United States v. Wirsing, 943 F.3d 175, 184 (4th Cir. 2019), is limited to those changes "expressly permitted" by statute or Rule 35, and a final sentence may be modified only "to the extent" the statute or rule expressly provides, 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(B). Because Section 404 of the First Step Act expressly permits a court only to reduce a sentence to account for Sections 2 and 3 of the Fair Sentencing Act, it does not authorize courts to modify a sentence to account for other changes in the law. Other changes are not "expressly permitted," so they are excluded. 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(B); see also United States v. Johnson, 529 U.S. 53, 58, 120 S. Ct. 1114, 146 L. Ed. 2d 39 (2000) ("When Congress provides exceptions in a statute, it does not follow that courts have authority to create others. The proper inference . . . is that Congress considered the issue of exceptions and, in the end, limited the statute to the ones set forth."). "The express back-dating only of Sections 2 and 3 of the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010—saying the new sentencing will be conducted 'as if' those two sections were in effect 'at the time the covered offense was committed'—supports that Congress did not intend that other changes were to be made as if they too were in effect at the time of the offense." United States v. Hegwood, 934 F.3d 414, 418 (5th Cir. 2019). As the text makes clear, Congress's concern in Section 404 was to extend the cocaine sentencing provisions of the Fair Sentencing Act retroactively, not to provide a general opportunity to collaterally attack a final sentence.
Another statute—28 U.S.C. § 2255—does give federal defendants an opportunity to collaterally attack their sentences. See Wirsing, 943 F.3d at 184 (identifying Section 2255 as a statute expressly permitting modification of a sentence under Section 3582(c)(1)(B)). But we rejected the availability of Section 2255 relief for the precise sentencing error Chambers raises here in United States v. Foote, 784 F.3d 931 (4th Cir. 2015). There, as here, the defendant was sentenced as a career offender under U.S.S.G. § 4B1.1(a) before our decision in United States v. Simmons, 649 F.3d 237 (4th Cir. 2011) (en banc). Even though Simmons meant that the defendant had been erroneously sentenced as a career offender, we held that he was not entitled to collateral relief. We concluded that "sentencing a defendant pursuant to advisory Guidelines based on a career offender status that is later invalidated" is not a constitutional or jurisdictional error,  nor is it "'a fundamental defect which inherently results in a complete miscarriage of justice.'" Foote, 784 F.3d at 936 (quoting Davis v. United States, 417 U.S. 333, 346, 94 S. Ct. 2298, 41 L. Ed. 2d 109 (1974)). We refused "to undermine the judicial system's interest in finality" by stretching Section 2255 to classify a Sentencing Guidelines error as a fundamental defect. Id. at 932.
Well aware that the district court lacks authority to modify his sentence under Section 2255, Chambers has tried to circumvent that provision by smuggling a challenge to the career-offender enhancement into his First Step Act proceeding. As previously explained, the text of the First Step Act does not permit this expansion. Moreover, the detailed requirements and strict scope of Section 2255 illustrate that Congress does not idly manufacture post-conviction remedies. An exception to sentence finality embedded in the silence of the First Step Act would be inconsistent with the principles undergirding our system of federal collateral review (much less with the text of Section 3582(c)(1)(B)).
II.
The majority's reasoning turns Section 3582(c) on its head by finding authorization to modify a final sentence in the absence of "limiting language to preclude the court from applying intervening case law." Maj. Op. 10. But Congress has already told us how to interpret silence in this context: a court "may not modify a term of imprisonment" except "to the extent otherwise expressly permitted by statute or by Rule 35." 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c), (c)(1)(B). Rather than look for an additional prohibition, the majority should be looking for permission. Yet it does not identify any statute expressly permitting a court to modify a sentence to account for changes in the law concerning the proper application of the Sentencing Guidelines.
Applying the plainly stated limits of Section 3582(c)(1)(B) and the First Step Act would further, not "pervert," congressional intent. Maj. Op. 12. Congress's manifest intent in Sections 2 and 3 of the Fair Sentencing Act and Section 404 of the First Step Act is to reduce the disparity in crack and powder cocaine sentencing, not to correct Guidelines application errors. See Fair Sentencing Act Pub. L. No. 111-220 (Section 2 titled "Cocaine Sentencing Disparity Reduction"); Wirsing, 943 F.3d at 180. Neither Chambers nor the majority has identified anything in the text of the statutes or their legislative history indicating that Congress wished to create an avenue of post-conviction relief for defendants bringing legal claims unrelated to crack cocaine sentencing. Nor is there any reason to think Congress would want to create a mechanism for pre-2010 crack offenders, but not other offenders, to gain the benefit of retroactive caselaw. Instead, the text of Section 3582(c) and the First Step Act, read together, evince a purpose to allow one specific type of sentence reduction in order to ameliorate the consequences of cocaine sentencing disparities.
The majority's only other textual argument is to note that Section 3582(c) and Section 3582(c)(1)(B), the mechanism by which the First Step Act permits sentence reduction proceedings, refer to "modify[ing]" a sentence, while Section 404(b) of the First Step Act refers to "impos[ing] a reduced sentence."1  See Maj. Op. 9. The import of that difference is not apparent; given that both terms apply to a First  Step Act proceeding, "impos[ing] a reduced sentence" is presumably a species of "modify[ing]" a sentence. See, e.g., Wirsing, 943 F.3d at 184 ("The First Step Act thus fits under the narrow exception to finality provided by § 3582(c)(1)(B) because it expressly permits the court to modify a term of imprisonment." (internal quotation marks and emphasis omitted)); Hegwood, 934 F.3d at 418-419 ("[T]he sentencing is being conducted as if all the conditions for the original sentencing were again in place with the one exception" of the changes mandated by the Fair Sentencing Act; therefore, "[t]he new sentence conceptually substitutes for the original sentence, as opposed to modifying that sentence."). And any difference between "modify" and "impose" does not tell us whether the court is authorized (or as the majority would have it, required) to apply intervening changes in the law aside from the one change identified in the First Step Act. In any event, we cannot read the authorization to "impose a reduced sentence" in isolation from the phrase "as if sections 2 and 3 of the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 . . . were in effect at the time the covered offense was committed," which directly follows and modifies it. See United States v. Morton, 467 U.S. 822, 828, 104 S. Ct. 2769, 81 L. Ed. 2d 680 (1984) (stating that "[w]e do not . . . construe statutory phrases in isolation; we read statutes as a whole," and reasoning that words "must be read in light of the immediately following phrase").
The majority accuses the Government of taking an "extreme position" that would require a court to "perpetuate a Guidelines calculation error" by not applying intervening caselaw to change a sentence beyond the modification expressly articulated in the First Step Act. Maj. Op. 13. But the Supreme Court has rejected the argument that "any mistakes committed at the initial sentencing are imposed anew if they are not corrected" in a sentence modification proceeding. Dillon v. United States, 560 U.S. 817, 831, 130 S. Ct. 2683, 177 L. Ed. 2d 271 (2010). As the Court has explained, such an argument misunderstands the scope of sentence modification proceedings. Id. The majority casts aside Dillon, in which the Supreme Court rejected the argument that the district court should have applied intervening caselaw to correct Guidelines errors in the defendant's original sentence, because it concerned Section 3582(c)(2). See Maj. Op. 11-12. But the Court's reasoning was not confined to the special restrictions contained in that provision. In its primary analysis, the Court reasoned that the text of Section 3582(c)(2)—which permits "'modif[ication of] a term of imprisonment' by giving courts the power to 'reduce' an otherwise final sentence" in specified circumstances—and its narrow scope—it applies only to a limited class of prisoners—show "that Congress intended to authorize only a limited adjustment to an otherwise final sentence and not a plenary resentencing proceeding." Dillon, 560 U.S. at 825-826. The same can be said of the text and scope of Section 3582(c)(1)(B) and the First Step Act; Dillon's reasoning on that score applies with equal force here.2 
The majority's final argument is to liken "[r]etroactive Guidelines errors based on intervening case law" to typos, the implication being that surely a court possesses authority to correct such errors. Maj. Op. 13.  But even a typo in a final sentence requires authorization to correct, and such authorization exists, not in inferences from statutory lacunae, but in plainly stated grants of authority. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 35(a) ("Within 14 days after sentencing, the court may correct a sentence that resulted from arithmetical, technical, or other clear error."); 28 U.S.C. § 2106 (providing that the Supreme Court and courts of appeals may "affirm, modify, vacate, set aside or reverse" any judgment lawfully brought before them and may remand for entry of judgment or further proceedings); 18 U.S.C. § 3742(f), (g) (providing for resentencing upon remand from a court of appeals).
Of course, the Guidelines enhancement error that the majority would retroactively correct here is not a simple typo. Correcting this error requires fashioning a new legal rule that extends beyond our existing caselaw and creates considerable tension with our decision in Foote. Simmons addressed when a North Carolina offense is "punishable by imprisonment for more than one year" for purposes of 21 U.S.C. § 802(44). See Simmons, 649 F.3d at 239. In Miller v. United States, 735 F.3d 141 (4th Cir. 2013), we held that the Simmons rule for determining whether a North Carolina offense was "punishable" by imprisonment exceeding one year applied retroactively in the context of the federal felon-in-possession statute, 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). Miller, 735 F.3d at 142, 146-147. We reasoned that, for defendants whose predicate convictions were North Carolina felonies for which they could not have received sentences of more than one year in prison, Simmons rendered those defendants "actually innocent of the . . . offense of which they were convicted," and because Simmons "altered the class of persons that the law punishes," it therefore announced "a substantive rule that is retroactively applicable." Id. at 146 (internal quotation marks omitted). In reaching that conclusion, we distinguished a situation in which a change in the law could not be used to retroactively modify a sentence because the change did not "place[] a class of persons beyond the [government's] power to punish or expose[] a defendant to punishment that the law cannot impose upon him." Id. at 147.
In Foote, we held that, when applied to a career-offender Guidelines enhancement, Simmons does not place a class of persons beyond the government's power to punish or expose a defendant to punishment that the law cannot impose upon him. Foote, 784 F.3d at 940-941. We therefore rejected an attempt to use Simmons to correct the Guidelines error on collateral review, noting, among other things that, "while the career offender designation may have affected the ultimate sentence imposed, it did not affect the lawfulness of the sentence itself—then or now." Foote, 784 F.3d at 943 (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Read together, Miller and Foote teach that Simmons retroactively invalidates a sentence where the defendant is rendered actually innocent of the underlying conviction but cannot be used to collaterally attack a career-offender Guidelines enhancement.
Granting relief beyond that offered by the Fair Sentencing Act in this case, therefore, is not a straightforward application of existing law but an expansion, requiring, at a minimum, a sub silentio ruling on the retroactive effect of the Simmons error in a Guidelines-calculation context. Furthermore, in Foote we reasoned that the Simmons error was not cognizable on collateral review in part because "when it comes to errors in application of the Guidelines, it is hard to fathom what the dividing line would be between a fundamental defect and mere error." Foote, 784 F.3d at 943. The position adopted by the majority requires sentence modification for these "mere" Guidelines  errors, relief we rejected in Foote as "deal[ing] a wide-ranging blow to the judicial system's interest in finality." Id. Indeed, the majority's reasoning opens the door to novel and far-reaching holdings, potentially greatly expanding the scope of First Step Act proceedings. Can a defendant argue that intervening precedent should be made retroactive for the first time in a First Step Act proceeding? Why is the question limited to intervening precedent at all? Under the majority's reasoning, there is no "limiting language" in the First Step Act preventing defendants who are eligible for a reduction from bringing any kind of legal attack on their original sentence. Maj. Op. 10. The majority opinion does little to cabin the scope of cognizable legal errors in First Step Act proceedings and opens the door to an expansive new scheme of judicially created post-conviction relief.
III.
The majority also claims to issue two more holdings on issues that were not disputed by the parties in this Court or the district court: whether a district court must apply the Section 3553(a) factors in a First Step Act proceeding and whether a district court may consider post-sentencing conduct in that proceeding. See Maj. Op. 13-16. Those issues are not presented by this case, nor have they been subject to adversarial testing here. Bare reliance on parties' concessions is not how sound law is made. See United States v. Bradley, 917 F.3d 493, 511 (6th Cir. 2019) ("It is not our role to fashion new law without the benefits of the adversarial system, in which the parties evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of each other's arguments."); cf. United States v. Robinson, 460 F.3d 550, 558 (4th Cir. 2006) ("[O]ur judicial obligations compel us to examine independently the errors confessed," even where the government confesses error on appeal.). That is why it is our practice to avoid deciding questions when doing so is not necessary to resolve the central dispute in the case. See, e.g., United States v. Jackson, 952 F.3d 492, 497 (4th Cir. 2020); United States v. Venable, 943 F.3d 187, 194 & n.11 (4th Cir. 2019). The record reveals no reason to think that the district court disagreed with the parties or would resist their consensus on remand, therefore I would not address these two uncontested issues.
Contrary to the majority's protests, see Maj. Op. 11-12, its decision puts us in conflict with our sister circuits on the interpretation of the First Step Act and the breadth of its sentence reduction proceeding. See Hegwood, 934 F.3d at 418-419 ("The district court [must] decide[] on a new sentence by placing itself in the time frame of the original sentencing, altering the relevant legal landscape only by the changes mandated by the 2010 Fair Sentencing Act."); United States v. Carter, 792 Fed. Appx. 660, 663 (11th Cir. 2019) ("[W]e reject [defendant's] argument that the First Step Act grants federal courts the broad authority to resentence a defendant based on subsequent changes in the law beyond those mandated by sections 2 and 3 of the Fair Sentencing Act."); see also Venable, 943 F.3d at 194 n.11 (quoting the Hegwood court's interpretation). Because the First Step Act's silence is properly interpreted as a restraint on district courts, not a license to further modify otherwise final sentences, I agree with our sister circuits and respectfully dissent.

 

