
I have no reason to question the majority's thorough analysis and its conclusion that 18 U.S.C. § 2260A creates a substantive offense rather than a mere sentencing enhancement. But I believe we are prevented from resolving this novel legal question because the appeal waiver contained in Beck's plea agreement requires that we dismiss his appeal.
Beck's plea agreement included a comprehensive waiver of his right to appeal his conviction or sentence except for claims of ineffective assistance of counsel or prosecutorial misconduct. When, as here, the government seeks to enforce an appeal waiver and has not breached the plea agreement, we will enforce the waiver if it is valid and if the issue being appealed falls within its scope. United States v. Manigan, 592 F.3d 621, 627 (4th Cir. 2010); see United States v. Blick, 408 F.3d 162, 168-169 (4th Cir. 2005). Beck does not dispute that his appeal waiver is valid, and a review of the plea colloquy confirms that Beck's waiver was knowing and voluntary. See United States v. Thornsbury, 670 F.3d 532, 537 (4th Cir. 2012) ("Generally, if a district court questions a defendant regarding the waiver of appellate rights during the Rule 11 colloquy and the record indicates that the defendant understood the full significance of the waiver, the waiver is valid."). On remand, the district court held a hearing on Beck's motion to withdraw his plea, but Beck did not present any evidence that the plea or appeal waiver was unknowing or involuntary.
Instead, Beck contends that his appeal falls outside the scope of his waiver because the district court imposed an illegal sentence in excess of its statutory authority. Beck is correct that an appeal of an illegal sentence will survive an appellate waiver, see Thornsbury, 670 F.3d at 539, and "[a] defendant who waives his right to appeal does not subject himself to being sentenced entirely at the whim of the district court," United States v. Marin, 961 F.2d 493, 496 (4th Cir. 1992). But "not every appeal alleging a legal error in sentencing challenges that sentence as 'illegal,' as we have used the term in our precedent." Thornsbury, 670 F.3d at 539. Rather, challenges to sentences as "illegal" that survive an appellate waiver are those involving "fundamental issues," such as "challenges claiming a district court exceeded its authority, claiming that a sentence was based on a constitutionally impermissible factor such as race, or claiming a post-plea violation of the right to counsel." Id. (citing Marin, 961 F.2d at 496, and United States v. Attar, 38 F.3d 727, 731-732 (4th Cir. 1994)). For example, we have found that a district court exceeded its authority at sentencing when it imposed restitution in the absence of authority to do so, see United States v. Broughton-Jones, 71 F.3d 1143, 1147-1149 (4th Cir. 1995), and we have suggested that a defendant "could not be said to have waived his right to appellate review of a sentence imposed in excess of the maximum penalty  provided by statute," Marin, 961 F.2d at 496.
Beck's argument on appeal boils down to an assertion that Section 2260A— regardless of whether considered a substantive offense or a sentencing enhancement—did not authorize the district court to impose a 10-year sentence for Count Five because Beck was not convicted of any of the predicate offenses listed in the statute. The offense-versus-enhancement question is a red herring; the reason Beck claims that his sentence is illegal is because he has not been convicted of one of Section 2260A's predicate offenses. See, e.g., Am. Opening Br. 30 ("Because § 2260A did not authorize the District Court to impose a ten-year sentence on Mr. Beck absent a conviction for an enumerated predicate offense, and because Mr. Beck was not convicted of a predicate offense, the District Court lacked the statutory authority to sentence Mr. Beck under § 2260A."). But Beck pleaded guilty to violating Section 2260A (again, regardless of whether it is characterized as an offense or an enhancement), and the district court sentenced Beck to precisely the sentence required by that statute. By pleading guilty, Beck agreed that he met all the elements of Count Five, that he was guilty, and that he could be sentenced to 10 years of imprisonment on Count Five, in accord with Section 2260A. The district court then sentenced Beck to 10 years on Count Five, in addition to 40 years on Count Two. Beck "reasonably contemplated" this sentence when he executed the appeal waiver; indeed, the plea agreement expressly contemplated "that he would be sentenced in exactly the manner in which he was, in fact, sentenced." Blick, 408 F.3d at 172-173; see id. (contrasting Broughton-Jones and Attar, where being sentenced without counsel or sentenced to an unauthorized restitution order "was not part of the bargain [the defendants] struck with the United States"). The district court did not exceed its authority when it imposed a sentence pursuant to the statutes to which Beck pleaded guilty.
Beck's supposed "illegal sentence" argument is really an argument that his conduct does not satisfy the statutory elements. He believes that the phrase "commits a felony offense involving a minor under [the statutory sections enumerated]" in Section 2260A means "is convicted of" such an offense. Without a conviction for one of the enumerated offenses, the argument goes, a defendant cannot be guilty of (and therefore sentenced for) a violation of Section 2260A.
This argument about the meaning of the statute of conviction and whether Beck's conduct satisfied the statutory requirements is covered by his comprehensive waiver and does not concern an illegal sentence. See, e.g., United States v. Flowers, 736 Fed. Appx. 352, 355 (4th Cir. 2018) (per curiam) (holding that argument about the definition of an "official act" necessary to prove Hobbs Act extortion under color of official right was within scope of appellate waiver). Notably, Beck does not contend that no court would have authority to sentence any defendant under Section 2260A; he argues only that his conduct—committing a predicate offense but without a conviction for such offense—does not satisfy the statutory elements. Cf. United States v. Cornette, 932 F.3d 204, 209 (4th Cir. 2019) (holding that a challenge to an ACCA sentencing enhancement was outside the defendant's appellate waiver because the challenge was predicated on the assertion that district courts lack statutory authority to impose sentences based on the residual clause of ACCA).
Moreover, by pleading guilty, Beck relinquished the right to assert on appeal that the statute to which he pleaded guilty should be construed not to apply to him.  See United States v. Willis, 992 F.2d 489, 491 (4th Cir. 1993) (concluding that the defendant "relinquished his right to contest the meaning" of the statute of conviction "[b]y pleading guilty"); see also United States v. Fitzgerald, 820 F.3d 107, 110 (4th Cir. 2016) ("It is the general rule that when a defendant pleads guilty, he waives all non-jurisdictional defects in the proceedings conducted prior to entry of the plea, and thus has no non-jurisdictional ground upon which to attack that judgment except the inadequacy of the plea." (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted)). Beck does not appeal the district court's denial of his motion to withdraw his guilty plea, nor does he argue that the district court erred in accepting his plea or the factual basis for it. Perhaps this is because of the advantage he gained by the dismissal of the other counts in the indictment, including one count with a potential mandatory life sentence. But Beck's requested remedy illustrates the problem with his argument: he would have us retain his guilty plea to violating Section 2260A but vacate his 10-year sentence under that statute, so that he receives no punishment for a crime he admits he committed. See Reply Br. 6-7.
"[B]ecause appeal waivers 'preserve[] the finality of judgments and sentences imposed pursuant to valid pleas of guilty,' they 'should be given their proper effect,' and a defendant who waives his right to appeal for the purpose of obtaining concessions from the government 'may not ignore his part of the bargain.'" Blick, 408 F.3d at 168 (quoting United States v. Wiggins, 905 F.2d 51, 54 (4th Cir. 1990)). Therefore, because Beck's appeal waiver forecloses his argument that Section 2260A does not apply to his conduct, I would dismiss his appeal in its entirety.

 

