
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 7:27 PM Z
Correll v. State
Supreme Court of Florida
July 23, 2015, Decided
CASE NO.: SC15-147

Reporter
2015 Fla. LEXIS 2177 *
 JERRY WILLIAM CORRELL, Appellant(s) vs. STATE OF FLORIDA, Appellee(s)  
Notice: DECISION WITHOUT PUBLISHED OPINION
  
Prior History:  [*1] Lower Tribunal No(s).: 481985CF003550, 000AOX.
Correll v. Sec'y, Dep't Of Corr., 932 F. Supp. 2d 1257, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37818 (M.D. Fla., 2013)  
Judges: LABARGA, C.J., and PARIENTE, LEWIS, QUINCE, and PERRY, JJ., concur. CANADY, J., dissents with an opinion, in which POLSTON, J., concurs.  
Opinion




On February 17, 2015, the execution of Jerry William Correll was stayed pending further order of this Court. In Glossip v. Gross, 135 S. Ct. 2726, 192 L. Ed. 2d 761, 2015 U.S. LEXIS 4255, 2015 WL 2473454 (U.S. 2015), the United States Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the use of midazolam in executions under Oklahoma's three-drug lethal injection protocol, which is nearly identical to that of Florida. The State has now filed a motion to vacate the stay of execution. Upon consideration of the motion, the response, the reply, the sur-reply, and all matters presently pending in this Court, the motion to vacate stay is denied without prejudice at this time.
We hereby relinquish jurisdiction to the Ninth Judicial Circuit Court for thirty-five days to conduct an evidentiary hearing to consider only Claim IV in Correll's Fourth Successive Motion for Postconviction Relief, in which Correll asserts that the use of midazolam is unconstitutional as applied to him because it would result in a paradoxical reaction, in light of his alleged brain damage and history of chemical dependency. The circuit court shall [*2]  render its decision and return the case to this Court by 5:00 p.m., Thursday, August 27, 2015. Upon issuance of the circuit court's order, the circuit court clerk shall immediately transmit a copy of the order to this Court. The circuit court clerk shall file a record of the entire relinquishment proceeding, including transcripts, with this Court and the parties no later than 4:00 p.m., Wednesday, September 2, 2015. The record resulting from the above relinquishment proceeding shall reflect "supplemental record volume 6, etc.," and page numbering should start with page 1 and run consecutively. Per In Re: Mandatory Submission of Electronic Copies of Documents, Fla. Admin. Order No. AOSC04-84, 2004 Fla. LEXIS 2537 (Sept. 13, 2004), the court reporters are directed to transmit a copy of any transcripts, in addition to paper copies, in an electronic format as required by the provisions of that order. An electronic version of the circuit court's order and the supplemental record shall be submitted to the following e-mail address: warrant@flcourts.org.
Thereafter, the parties are directed to file supplemental briefs limited solely to the issue raised during the relinquishment proceeding. The supplemental initial [*3]  brief shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m., Tuesday, September 8, 2015. The supplemental initial brief shall be limited to fifty pages. The supplemental answer brief shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m., Monday, September 14, 2015. The supplemental answer brief shall be limited to fifty pages. The supplemental reply brief shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m., Friday, September 18, 2015. The supplemental reply brief shall be limited to twenty-five pages. NO MOTION FOR ENLARGEMENT OF THE BRIEFS SHALL BE CONSIDERED. The above briefs shall be filed in this Court and copies provided to opposing counsel via e-mail to the following address: warrant@flcourts.org.
LABARGA, C.J., and PARIENTE, LEWIS, QUINCE, and PERRY, JJ., concur. CANADY, J., dissents with an opinion, in which POLSTON, J., concurs.
Dissent by: CANADY  
Dissent




CANADY, J., dissenting.
I dissent from the majority's decision to deny the State's motion to vacate the stay of execution. There is no basis for relinquishing jurisdiction to the circuit court for the purpose of conducting an evidentiary hearing on claim IV of Correll's fourth successive motion for postconviction relief. Correll's claim asserts that Florida's lethal injection protocol is [*4]  unconstitutional as applied to Correll because of the heightened risk that he will suffer a paradoxical reaction to midazolam due to his history of alcohol abuse and resulting brain damage. This claim is procedurally barred, insufficiently pleaded, and without merit under the decisions of this Court in Howell v. State, 133 So. 3d 511 (Fla.), cert. denied, 134 S. Ct. 1376, 188 L. Ed. 2d 372 (2014), and the United States Supreme Court in Glossip v. Gross, 135 S. Ct. 2726, 192 L. Ed. 2d 761 (2015). I would affirm the summary denial of this claim as well as Correll's other claims and grant the State's motion to vacate the stay.
Correll is under sentence of death for the 1985 murders of his five-year-old daughter, his ex-wife, his ex-mother-in-law, and his ex-sister-in-law. Correll v. State, 523 So. 2d 562, 564 (Fla. 1988). On January 16, 2015, Governor Scott signed Correll's death warrant and an execution was scheduled for February 26, 2015. After the death warrant was signed, Correll filed his third successive motion for postconviction relief. That motion was denied by the circuit court and pending on appeal in this Court when the United States Supreme Court granted certiorari in Glossip on January 23, 2015. See Glossip v. Gross, 135 S. Ct. 1173, 190 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2015).1  One of the issues raised by the petitioners in Glossip was the constitutionality of the use of midazolam as the first of three drugs administered in Oklahoma's [*5]  lethal injection protocol, which is substantially similar to the protocol used in Florida.2  In light of the grant of certiorari in Glossip, a majority of this Court sua sponte relinquished jurisdiction to the circuit court for the purpose of allowing Correll to raise a challenge to the use of midazolam in Florida's protocol.
Correll then filed a fourth successive motion for postconviction relief in which he alleged in claim IV that the use of midazolam in Florida's lethal injection protocol is unconstitutional as applied to him. He asserted that due to a diagnosis of brain damage resulting from his history of alcohol abuse, there is a heightened risk that he will have a paradoxical reaction to the midazolam and regain consciousness during the administration of the second and third drugs, which would cause him to experience severe pain and suffering in violation of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
In support of his claim, Correll relied on a report written for use in the Glossip litigation by one of the expert witnesses, Dr. David Lubarsky, an anesthesiologist.3  According to Dr. Lubarsky's report, "[a] paradoxical reaction is when the drug does not work as intended. These paradoxical reactions manifest in many ways such as hyperactivity and restlessness, but are not attended by the expected sedative effects[.]" The circuit court summarily denied the claim on the basis that this Court and the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals have rejected claims that the possibility of a paradoxical [*7]  reaction renders the use of midazolam in Florida's protocol unconstitutional. See Howell, 133 So. 3d at 522 (affirming the lower court's rejection of Dr. Lubarsky's testimony as to the possibility of a paradoxical reaction leading to a possible Eighth Amendment violation); Chavez v. Florida SP Warden, 742 F.3d 1267, 1271 (11th Cir.) (crediting the district court's factual findings rejecting Dr. Lubarsky's testimony that the possibility of a paradoxical reaction renders Florida's protocol unconstitutional), cert. denied sub nom. Chavez v. Palmer, 134 S. Ct. 1156, 188 L. Ed. 2d 144 (2014).
On June 29, 2015, the United States Supreme Court released its decision in Glossip. In it, the Court rejected the claim that the risk of a paradoxical reaction renders the use of midazolam in a lethal injection protocol unconstitutional. See Glossip, 135 S. Ct. at 2740 n.3. In reaching this conclusion, the Court noted the finding made by the federal district court that "the frequency with which a paradoxical reaction occurs 'is speculative' and that the risk 'occurs with the highest frequency [*8]  in low therapeutic doses,'" and the 500-milligram dose used in the Oklahoma and Florida lethal injection protocols "is much higher than the normal therapeutic dose[.]" Id. & n.3 (citation omitted). "[T]he mere fact that a method of execution might result in some unintended side effects does not amount to an Eighth Amendment violation [because] 'the Constitution does not demand the avoidance of all risk of pain.'" Id. (quoting Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35, 47, 128 S. Ct. 1520, 170 L. Ed. 2d 420 (2008) (plurality opinion)). "[S]ome risk of pain is inherent in any method of execution." Id. at 2733 (quoting Baze, 553 U.S. at 47).
Glossip also reaffirmed the Supreme Court's 2008 decision in Baze. The Court explained that under Baze, individuals who allege that a particular method of execution violates the Eighth Amendment must demonstrate: (1) that the challenged method is sure or very likely to cause serious illness and needless suffering, and give rise to sufficiently imminent dangers; and (2) the availability of an alternative that is feasible, readily implemented, and in fact significantly reduces a substantial risk of severe pain. Id. at 2737 (citations and quotation marks omitted).
As the Supreme Court did in Glossip, this Court has also rejected the claim that the risk of a paradoxical reaction renders the use of midazolam in lethal [*9]  injection unconstitutional. See Howell, 133 So. 3d at 511. In Howell, we found that even in the event of a paradoxical reaction, the graded noxious stimuli test conducted by the Florida Department of Corrections (DOC) is sufficient to ensure that an inmate is not subjected to an unconstitutional execution. Id. at 522.
Howell raised an as-applied constitutional challenge to the use of midazolam similar to Correll's. He contended that his history of bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, and extreme anxiety created an increased risk that he would suffer a paradoxical reaction to the midazolam, which could cause him to "regain consciousness during the administration of the second and third drugs in the protocol and thus be subjected to extreme pain[.]" Id. at 515, 518. The claim was initially summarily denied, but on appeal we relinquished jurisdiction to the circuit court for an evidentiary hearing. At the evidentiary hearing, Howell relied on Dr. Lubarsky in support of his claim. Id. at 519. The circuit court denied the claim again after the evidentiary hearing, and in affirming the denial of relief, we stated:
[A]s to Howell's as-applied challenge concerning the possibility of paradoxical reactions, he failed to establish that even [*10]  if he reacted to midazolam in an unexpected manner, he would undergo needless suffering. As Dr. Dershwitz testified, if a patient was experiencing a paradoxical reaction, the patient would be unable to pass a noxious stimuli test. In contrast, if the patient passed a graded noxious stimuli test in a state of unconsciousness by not responding to the test, the patient would be insensate. Howell failed to present any evidence at all to show that if he did experience a paradoxical reaction to midazolam, he would still pass the graded noxious stimuli test that DOC employees undertake to ensure unconsciousness. Accordingly, after a complete review of the record, we affirm the postconviction court's well-reasoned order and deny the claim that use of midazolam violates the Eighth Amendment.
Id.
Our decision in Howell affirming the circuit court's finding that a risk of a paradoxical reaction to midazolam due to brain damage or other mental health issues does not translate into a risk of intolerable pain and needless suffering in violation of the Eight Amendment should compel an affirmance of the summary denial of Correll's nearly identical challenge. See Ventura v. State, 2 So. 3d 194, 198 (Fla. 2009) ("This Court has thus previously rejected each of these challenges [*11]  to Florida's lethal-injection protocol and—based upon the sound principle of stare decisis—we continue the same course here."). This is especially true with regard to Correll's claim regarding brain damage because we specifically addressed the risk of a paradoxical reaction due to brain damage in Howell. Correll has not alleged that his claim differs in some way from Howell's because the cause of his brain damage is alcohol abuse. Nor has he alleged that his history of alcohol abuse will somehow render the DOC consciousness check ineffective. The claim is therefore meritless under Howell.
Correll's as-applied challenge to the use of midazolam also fails on other grounds. The claim is procedurally barred as successive because it could have been raised by Correll in his third successive motion for postconviction relief, filed on January 21, 2015. Correll has been aware of his history of alcohol abuse and brain damage for years, and the report by Dr. Lubarsky on which he relies is dated November 26, 2014. But Correll provided no valid explanation for his failure to raise the claim in his third successive motion. Correll's fourth successive motion states only that the claim was "not raised [*12]  in a former motion because Correll could not have anticipated the USSC Glossip proceedings regarding the constitutionality of the use of midazolam." This reason is not sufficient to avoid the procedural bar because: (1) certiorari was granted in Glossip on January 23, 2015, but Correll did not seek leave to amend his third successive motion before it was denied on January 28, 2015; and (2) the Glossip proceedings ultimately had no effect on the continued use of midazolam in executions.
The as-applied challenge was also insufficiently pleaded. "To state a claim under the Eighth Amendment, a defendant must show that a state's lethal injection protocol is 'sure or very likely to cause serious illness and needless suffering.'" Banks v. State, 150 So. 3d 797, 800 (Fla.), cert. denied, 135 S. Ct. 511, 190 L. Ed. 2d 386 (2014) (quoting Brewer v. Landrigan, 562 U.S. 996, 996, 131 S. Ct. 445, 178 L. Ed. 2d 346 (2010)); see also Baze, 553 U.S. at 52 n.3 (noting that a showing of a substantial risk of serious harm is a "threshold requirement" for asserting a viable Eighth Amendment challenge). Correll, however, failed to make any such assertion. He merely alleged that a paradoxical reaction to midazolam produces a "heightened risk of unconstitutional pain and suffering," and that "if a paradoxical reaction occurs, it is possible [he] might appear unconscious long enough to pass any consciousness check, then [*13]  regain consciousness after the second or third drug has begun to be administered." (Emphasis added.) These allegations are insufficient to state a claim under the Eighth Amendment.
Also rendering Correll's claim legally insufficient is his failure to identify "a known and available alternative" that is "feasible, readily implemented, and in fact significantly reduce[s] a substantial risk of severe pain." Glossip, 135 S. Ct. at 2737 (quoting Baze, 553 U.S. at 52) (alteration in original). With respect to an alternative drug, Correll's fourth successive motion suggested only "[t]o the extent that Correll must name an alternative . . . , any barbiturate is superior to midazolam for purposes of inducing and maintaining unconsciousness because of its direct effect on GABA receptors." Correll not only failed to identify a specific alternative, he failed to allege that such an alternative is available and readily implemented. This failure is fatal to his claim. See Chavez, 742 F.3d at 1274 (noting that Chavez's failure to offer a specific, feasible alternative to Florida's protocol was fatal to his Eighth Amendment claim) (Carnes, J., concurring). And although Correll mentioned the barbiturate pentobarbital in his motion, his conclusory allegation that pentobarbital is available for use in Florida based [*14]  on the fact that several executions in other states have been carried out recently using pentobarbital is insufficient to establish an alternative that is "available," "feasible," and "readily implemented." See generally Troy v. State, 57 So. 3d 828, 840 (Fla. 2011) ("Conclusory allegations are not sufficient to establish a legally sufficient claim for postconviction relief." (citing Freeman v. State, 761 So. 2d 1055, 1061 (Fla. 2000))). Indeed, as the Supreme Court noted in Glossip, Florida became the first state to substitute midazolam for pentobarbital as part of a three-drug lethal injection protocol when it could no longer acquire pentobarbital for use in executions.
Because I conclude that Correll's as-applied challenge to the use of midazolam in Florida's lethal injection protocol was procedurally barred, insufficiently pleaded, and without merit under the precedent of this Court in Howell and the United States Supreme Court in Glossip, I would affirm the summary denial of the claim. The trial court's denial of all Correll's claims should be affirmed and the State's motion to lift the stay of execution should be granted. Accordingly, I dissent.
POLSTON, J., concurs.

 

End of Document
