
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 7:27 PM Z
Doty v. State
Supreme Court of Florida
July 14, 2014, Decided
No. SC13-1257

Reporter
2014 Fla. LEXIS 3900 *
 WAYNE C. DOTY, Appellant, v. STATE OF FLORIDA, Appellee.  
Subsequent History: Decision reached on appeal by Doty v. State, 170 So. 3d 731, 2015 Fla. LEXIS 1468 (Fla., July 9, 2015)  
Counsel:  [*1] Nancy Ann Daniels, Public Defender, and William Carl McLain, Assistant Public Defender, Second Judicial Circuit, Tallahassee, Florida, for Appellant. 
Pamela Jo Bondi, Attorney General, and Patrick M. Delaney, Assistant Attorney General, Tallahassee, Florida, for Appellee.  
Judges: LABARGA, C.J., and PARIENTE, LEWIS, QUINCE, CANADY, POLSTON, and PERRY, JJ., concur.  
Opinion by:  LABARGA, C.J.  
Opinion




Wayne C. Doty is a prisoner who has been sentenced to death and whose direct appeal of his first-degree murder conviction and death sentence is currently pending before this Court pursuant to our mandatory jurisdiction under article V, section 3(b)(1), of the Florida Constitution. Doty filed a pro se "Motion for Leave (In Re) of Clarification on Appellate Counsel's Role in Direct Appeal Process in the Above Style Cause, Where Appellant has Filed Pro Se Brief (In Lieu) of Request to Proceed Pro Se, in Explaining Why he Chooses not to Pursue, Nor Consent to Any Counsel Pursuing an Appeal on his Behalf in the Imposition of a Death Sentence in Appellant's Case." In this motion, as well as in other pro se filings, Doty made clear that he wishes either to dismiss the direct appeal or limit the advocacy of his appointed appellate counsel, in accordance with his stated desire to be executed. [*2]  We ordered responses from Doty's appointed appellate counsel and from the State. Appellate counsel asserted that he viewed his obligation to file an adversarial brief as consistent with this Court's decision in Klokoc v. State, 589 So. 2d 219 (Fla. 1991), because this Court's appellate review must ensure that the death sentence was "imposed in accord with constitutional and legal directives." The State similarly contended that Klokoc governs and that "Florida law requires [appellate] counsel to file an adversarial pleading." Both responses agreed that Doty should be permitted to file a pro se supplemental brief expressing his personal positions and interests with regard to the appeal. In consideration of the motion and the responses, and based on this Court's important constitutional and statutory obligations to review the legal validity of the conviction and death sentence, we deny Doty's motion to prevent his attorney from filing an adversarial brief. See Robertson v. State, 143 So. 3d 907, 911 (Fla. 2014). Doty's desire to restrict appellate counsel's ability to "prosecute the appeal in a genuinely adversary manner" is inconsistent with the "diligent appellate advocacy addressed to both the judgment and the sentence" that this Court requires [*3]  in order to assist in the mandatory appellate review of Doty's judgment of conviction and sentence of death. Klokoc, 589 So. 2d at 221-22; see also § 921.141(4), Fla. Stat. (2013). The Initial Brief, which was filed by appellate counsel on April 23, 2014, is hereby accepted, and counsel for both Doty and the State are directed to follow this Court's previously issued briefing schedule. In addition, as agreed by the parties, this Court has received and will consider Doty's pro se brief and pro se supplemental brief, filed on February 18, 2014, and May 12, 2014, respectively, in which he expresses his personal positions and interests with regard to the subject matter of the appeal. 
Dissent by: CANADY, J.  
Dissent




CANADY, J., dissents with an opinion, in which POLSTON, J., concurs. CANADY, J., dissenting. I dissent. For the reasons I have explained in Robertson v. State, 143 So. 3d 907 (Fla. 2014), I would remand to the trial court to determine whether Mr. Doty has made a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver of his right to appeal. If he has done so, this appeal should be dismissed. POLSTON, J., concurs. 

 

End of Document
