, dissenting.
The government "depends upon the ability of the people to make their wishes known to their representatives." E. R.R. Presidents Conference v. Noerr Motor Freight, Inc., 365 U.S. 127, 137, 81 S. Ct. 523, 5 L. Ed. 2d 464 (1961). At the core of the First Amendment is the ability of all citizens to influence government through petitioning and speech. See U.S. Const. amend. I; McDonald v. Smith, 472 U.S. 479, 482, 105 S. Ct. 2787, 86 L. Ed. 2d 384 (1985) (explaining that "James Madison made clear in the congressional debate on the [First Amendment] that people may communicate their will" by petitioning and speaking to "the legislature and government officials" (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).
Yet Missouri regulates these First Amendment activities as "lobbying," even if no money changes hands, precisely because they influence government. Missouri's lobbying-disclosure law crosses the constitutional line by burdening Calzone's core First Amendment activities without either adequate justification or narrow enough tailoring. I accordingly dissent.
I.
Missouri law treats Calzone as a lobbyist because he has been "designated . . . by . . . [a] nonprofit corporation" to act on its behalf "for the purpose of attempting to influence" legislation. Mo. Rev. Stat. § 105.470(5)(c). But let us be clear about what, exactly, Missouri means by "lobbying." Calzone is a Missouri citizen who speaks to legislators. No one pays him to do so, and he does not pay anyone in connection with his activities. To be sure, Calzone created a nonprofit "alter ego," as Missouri characterizes it, to amplify his voice. But even so, Calzone is not who we typically think of as a lobbyist.
The court insists on ignoring the fact that Calzone does not spend money on his advocacy efforts based on a crabbed reading of his complaint and motion for injunctive relief. In my view, we cannot overlook Calzone's lack of expenditures because it has been a piece of his as-applied challenge to Missouri's lobbying-disclosure law all along.
The meat of Calzone's as-applied challenge has always been, as one might expect,  that Missouri cannot constitutionally apply its registration and reporting requirements to him. It simply is not true, as the court claims, that Calzone raised the issue of expenditures for the first time at oral argument. Beginning with his appearance before the Missouri Ethics Commission and continuing with his complaint in the district court, memorandum in support of his motion for a permanent injunction, stipulation of facts, briefing to this court, and oral argument, the record is stuffed full of references to Calzone's lack of expenditures, leaving no doubt that a key piece of his argument is that he does not give money or gifts to legislators.5  The district court and Missouri were on notice that Calzone's constitutional argument folds in both his lack of compensation and his lack of expenditures, and so are we. Just because Calzone's lack of compensation is the lede does not mean that we get to bury the rest of the story.
The procedural posture provides us with yet another clue about the scope of our review. The district court's denial of a permanent injunction is just one ingredient  of Calzone's appeal. The other is the court's decision to enter final judgment against him. By dismissing Calzone's complaint, the court rejected his request for a declaration that Missouri's lobbying-disclosure law is unconstitutional as applied to him, an individual who, as his complaint makes clear, neither is paid nor pays anyone else in connection with his advocacy. See Verified Complaint 1, 12 (stating that "[Calzone] does not give legislators any gifts" and requesting declaratory relief). The entire case is accordingly before us, not just Calzone's unsuccessful motion for a permanent injunction and not just the narrow issue the court addresses.
II.
Turning to the merits of Calzone's First Amendment challenge, the court would apply exacting scrutiny because Missouri's law calls for disclosure. Exacting scrutiny "requires a substantial relation between the disclosure requirement and a sufficiently important governmental interest." Minn. Citizens Concerned for Life, Inc. v. Swanson, 692 F.3d 864, 874-75 (8th Cir. 2012) (en banc) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).6  "Though possibly less rigorous than strict scrutiny, exacting scrutiny is more than a rubber stamp." Id. at 876 (citations omitted).
Missouri defends its right to regulate Calzone's activities based on a desire for transparency.7  Missouri's asserted transparency interest, which the court accepts, has two layers: (1) an interest in "avoiding the fact or even the appearance of public corruption" and (2) an interest in "knowing who is attempting to influence legislators and public policy." Ante at 11. The first layer of its argument falls short because, as applied to Calzone, there is no "substantial relation between the disclosure requirement" and the government's anti-corruption interest. Swanson, 692 F.3d at 874-75 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The second layer fares no better because an interest in transparency for transparency's sake is not "sufficiently important" to justify the burden on Calzone's First Amendment rights. Id. (citation omitted).
Missouri begins with its theory that Calzone must register as a lobbyist to prevent the fact or the appearance of corruption. The Supreme Court has recognized that the government has an important, if not compelling, interest in preventing corruption and the appearance of corruption. See McCutcheon v. FEC, 572 U.S. 185, 199, 134  S. Ct. 1434, 188 L. Ed. 2d 468 (2014) (plurality opinion). Beginning with United States v. Harriss, courts have generally upheld lobbying-disclosure rules based on the need for the public to know about potentially corrupting financial arrangements. See 347 U.S. 612, 625, 74 S. Ct. 808, 98 L. Ed. 989 (1954) (describing Congress's goal as "want[ing] only to know who is being hired, who is putting up the money, and how much"); Minn. Citizens Concerned for Life, Inc. v. Kelley, 427 F.3d 1106, 1111 (8th Cir. 2005) (recognizing the government's compelling interest in "avoiding even the appearance of corruption"). Missouri must still prove, however, that its disclosure requirement, as applied to Calzone, bears a "substantial relation" to its anti-corruption interest. It does not come close to meeting its burden.
Missouri has not pointed to "any plausible reason" why extending its reporting requirements to Calzone—who neither spends nor receives any money—is "necessary to accomplish [its] interest[]." Swanson, 692 F.3d at 877. Nor has it "provide[d] any real-world examples" of pure advocacy efforts, divorced from the expenditure of money, leading to the type of corruption (or even the appearance of corruption) that it apparently fears. McCutcheon, 572 U.S. at 217-18 (plurality opinion). If Missouri is concerned about the corrupting influence that money could play in connection with Calzone's advocacy, it can address this concern "through less problematic measures," Swanson, 692 F.3d at 876-77 (brackets and citation omitted), by, for example, applying the unchallenged portions of its lobbying-disclosure law, see Mo. Rev. Stat. § 105.470(5)(a), (b), (d) (extending the registration requirement to individuals who are paid to lobby and to individuals who spend "fifty dollars or more" in a calendar year to influence legislation).
The court bakes up an alternate theory by speculating that "[t]hough the lobbyists may not be receiving money, unpaid lobbyists could still offer things of value to legislators, creating a sufficiently important governmental interest in avoiding the fact or appearance of public corruption." Ante at 11 (emphasis added). But Missouri already requires people who offer something of value to register. See Mo. Rev. Stat. § 105.470(5)(d). So extending the registration requirement to people like Calzone, who have not given anything to anyone, is unnecessary. "[M]ere conjecture" cannot justify burdening First Amendment rights, Nixon v. Shrink Mo. Gov't PAC, 528 U.S. 377, 392, 120 S. Ct. 897, 145 L. Ed. 2d 886 (2000), and neither the court nor Missouri offers us anything more.
All that remains, then, is Missouri's "important interest," as the court puts it, "in knowing who is pressuring and attempting to influence legislators . . . ." Ante at 11. But "pressuring and attempting to influence legislators," id., is just another way of describing core political speech, see Meyer v. Grant, 486 U.S. 414, 421-22, 108 S. Ct. 1886, 100 L. Ed. 2d 425 (1988) ("[I]nteractive communication concerning political change . . . is appropriately described as 'core political speech.'"); see also McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Comm'n, 514 U.S. 334, 346, 115 S. Ct. 1511, 131 L. Ed. 2d 426 (1995) ("Discussion of public issues . . . [is] integral to the operation of the system of government established by our Constitution. The First Amendment affords the broadest protection to such political expression . . . ." (citation omitted)); United States v. Fin. Comm. to Re-elect the President, 507 F.2d 1194, 1201, 165 U.S. App. D.C. 371 (D.C. Cir. 1974) ("Lobbying is of course a pejorative term, but another name for it is petitioning for the redress of grievances."). The court, like Missouri, fails to explain why compiling  a public list of people who are engaging in core political speech is "important."
Indeed, the court's decision in this case is in tension with McIntyre, which recognized that the "decision to remain anonymous," like the decision to speak itself, "is an aspect of the freedom of speech protected by the First Amendment." 514 U.S. at 342. To be sure, McIntyre involved anonymous handbills published in an attempt to influence a referendum. But there, like here, the state attempted to justify its law, and in particular the penalty it imposed on violators, based on an "interest" in having the "electorate" receive what the state deemed to be "relevant information." Id. at 348.
The Supreme Court rejected Ohio's asserted transparency-related interest, holding that "providing voters with additional relevant information does not justify a state requirement that a writer make statements or disclosures she would otherwise omit." Id. at 348-49. So too here. Calzone engages in core political speech just like the anonymous speaker in McIntyre, wants to retain control over his communications, and objects to being forced to disclose the "content of [his] thoughts on . . . controversial issue[s]" to the world. Id. at 355; see also Mo. Rev. Stat. § 105.473(12) (requiring lobbyists to report all of the legislation they supported or opposed).
Even so, the court assures us that the burdens on Calzone are "minimal" or "very slight." Ante at 12. The court's assurances, however, offer little comfort in light of the "minimal" justifications and evidence that Missouri provides for regulating the activities of individuals like Calzone. Moreover, the court's characterization understates the burden of complying with Missouri's lobbying-disclosure law.
Under the law, Calzone has to submit up to fourteen reports and to re-register with the Commission each year. See Mo. Rev. Stat. § 105.473. The court says, however, that these reports would be "eas[y]" for Calzone to produce because he has no "expenditures related to his lobbying activities." Ante at 13. But this argument proves my point. Missouri cannot possibly have a greater interest in receiving blank reports than Calzone has in avoiding unnecessary paperwork, especially because meeting Missouri's technical filing rules is a legal requirement for exercising his First Amendment rights and the penalties for noncompliance are steep. Mo. Rev. Stat. §§ 105.478, 558.011(1)(5) (authorizing a punishment of up to four years in prison); see also id. § 105.473(7) (setting a fine of up to $10,000 for employing an unregistered lobbyist). The only thing "minimal" about Missouri's lobbying-disclosure law is the registration fee of $10, but even that is too high when all Calzone wants to do is speak.
The completed puzzle here is more troubling than the sum of its parts. Although Calzone presents an as-applied challenge, which prevents us from considering other potential challengers to Missouri's law, the scope of the law is far-reaching. It does not appear to treat a member of a religious or civic organization who has been "designated" to attend a "Lobby Day" any differently from Calzone, who advocates on behalf of Missouri First. The law seemingly sweeps up all unpaid political advocacy by anyone who acts on behalf of someone else, no matter how often it occurs and regardless of its purpose.
By sweeping so widely, Missouri's law endangers the free exchange of ideas. Indeed, a political adversary, an unscrupulous government official, or even a legislator tired of being held accountable could simply submit a complaint to the Commission  accusing a politically active citizen of lobbying—that is, speaking out—without first registering as a lobbyist. It may just be simpler for a citizen to skip a lobbying day or pass up the opportunity to call a legislator rather than having to complete tedious paperwork or risk sizeable fines and criminal penalties.
III.
Missouri's lobbying-disclosure law, as applied to Calzone, does not withstand exacting scrutiny. I would accordingly remand this case to the district court for consideration of what relief, if any, Calzone is due.    

 

