, dissenting.
This case is about competition for long-haul truck drivers. CRST recruits drivers by providing a training program and then recoups its costs over the following ten months. TransAm, a direct competitor, finds its drivers through nationwide advertising and then provides training-reimbursement payments. These different business models happened to clash when TransAm recruited some of CRST's drivers before they had completed their ten-month contracts. The court holds that, under Iowa law, TransAm's actions could amount to tortious interference. As may be clear by now, I disagree.
Tortious interference with contract is not about favoring some business models over others. Rather, as Iowa law recognizes, it is about deterring improper interference with contracts. See Green v. Racing Ass'n of Cent. Iowa, 713 N.W.2d 234, 243 (Iowa 2006). One factor matters most in determining whether an alleged tortfeasor has acted improperly: motive. See, e.g., Nesler v. Fisher & Co., 452 N.W.2d 191, 197 (Iowa 1990) ("Motive or purpose determines whether the interference was improper."). To establish an improper motive, CRST had to "identify specific facts" revealing that TransAm was motivated by some "desire . . . to accomplish the interference." Green, 713 N.W.2d at 244-45 (emphasis added; citation omitted); see also Nesler, 452 N.W.2d at 197-98.
CRST has nothing. There is no evidence that TransAm's recruiting efforts, including its nationwide advertisements, were aimed at anything more nefarious than finding qualified drivers. See Kern v. Palmer Coll. of Chiropractic, 757 N.W.2d 651, 663 (Iowa 2008) (distinguishing "legitimate business objectives" from "improper purpose[s]"). Without evidence of an improper motive, the wheels come off CRST's tortious-interference claim. See Green, 713 N.W.2d at 245 ("If the sole motive is a legitimate purpose derived from the law, then any interference is not improper as a matter of law.").
To be sure, TransAm offered better terms than CRST, whose business model required it to pay drivers less until the company recouped its training costs. Even so, under the Restatement (Second) of Torts, which Iowa has adopted, simply offering better terms is not enough:
Another method [for A to induce] B to sever his business relations with C is to offer B a better bargain than that which he has with C. . . . A's freedom[, however,] to conduct his business in the usual  manner, to advertise his goods, to extol their qualities, to fix their prices and to sell them is not restricted by the fact that B has agreed to buy similar goods from C. Even though A knows of B's contract with C, he may nevertheless send his regular advertising to B and may solicit business in normal course. This conduct does not constitute inducement of breach of the contract.5 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 766 cmt. m (Am. Law Inst. 1979) (emphasis added); see also Kern, 757 N.W.2d at 664 (applying the Restatement).
The bottom line is that TransAm was free, in the Restatement's words, to recruit through its "regular advertising"; "conduct [its] business in the usual manner"; and "extol [the job's] qualities." Restatement (Second) of Torts § 766 cmt. m. It was free to do so even if it knew that some of the drivers might have contracts with CRST. Id.; see ante at 7-8; see also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 766 cmt. n (explaining that it is not tortious for A to enter into an agreement with B, even if A knows that performing their new agreement will require B to breach a preexisting contract with someone else). That is, after all, how the "American system of free enterprise" works. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 768 cmt. a.
It would be one thing if TransAm had sent a targeted communication to CRST drivers offering them a "special" deal for breaking their contracts. Id. § 766 cmt. m, illus. 3. If, for example, a competitor were willing to take a financial hit to induce a breach, it would suggest that an improper, "non-business-related motivation" might be at play. Kern, 757 N.W.2d at 663.
But what transpired here is different for at least two reasons. First, in its nationwide advertising, TransAm did not specifically target CRST drivers. Second, CRST drivers did not receive a "special" deal. Rather, their deal was actually worse in the sense that they were ineligible for the training-reimbursement payments that other prospective drivers were offered. See ante at 7. Had TransAm's motive been to interfere with CRST's contracts, it would have offered drivers an extra incentive to breach them, not refused to provide them with the same incentives available to others. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 766 cmt. m, illus. 3.
The court appears to agree with me, up to a point. See ante at 8 (discussing Restatement (Second) of Torts § 768). Where it takes a detour is the non-compete agreements, which in its view, prohibit competition for employees altogether, targeted or not. Id.; see Restatement (Second) of Torts § 768 cmt. i. This interpretation of Iowa law, however, puts the cart before the horse.
The mere existence of non-compete agreements does not relieve CRST from proving that TransAm had an improper motive. See Green, 713 N.W.2d at 245 (discussing what a plaintiff must show); see also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 768 cmt. a ("[T]he fact that the actor is not justified on the basis of competition [alone] is not conclusive of [its] liability. [Its] action may be justified for other reasons."). After all, their existence, standing alone, tells us only about the obligations that CRST and its drivers had to each other. It tells us nothing about TransAm's motives, which means the non-compete agreements are really beside the point.  See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 768 cmt. h (explaining that even when section 768's competition justification does not apply, a defendant's "interference may be proper because of other circumstances including the fact of competition").
Without evidence of TransAm's improper motive, CRST's unjust-enrichment claim falls apart too. See Fin. Mktg. Servs., Inc. v. Hawkeye Bank & Tr. of Des Moines, 588 N.W.2d 450, 460 (Iowa 1999); see also ante at 13-14 (explaining that the viability of CRST's unjust-enrichment claim depends on whether its tortious-interference claim survives). CRST could have tried to recover the money it had spent on training from the drivers themselves, who were the ones that breached their contracts. But as for its claims against TransAm, summary judgment should have been the end of the road.
Faced with a conflict between two competing business models, tort law does not require us to pick one over the other. And without evidence of an improper motive, the court should not put the brakes on legitimate competition. I respectfully dissent.

 

