, dissenting.
This case requires us to answer two questions. The first is whether a prior version of Missouri's medical-records statute authorizes a single fee for "[s]earch and retrieval" or one fee for a "[s]earch" and a separate one for "retrieval." If a single fee covers both actions, then the second question is whether CIOX may charge a customer when it searches but does not retrieve anything. I respectfully dissent because, in my view, the statute sets a single fee that requires the completion of both actions.
I.
Under Missouri law, the "primary rule of statutory interpretation is to give effect to legislative intent as reflected in the plain language of the statute at issue." Parktown Imps., Inc. v. Audi of Am., Inc., 278 S.W.3d 670, 672 (Mo. banc 2009). This includes giving words and phrases their common and ordinary meaning, Abrams v. Ohio Pacific Express, 819 S.W.2d 338, 340 (Mo. banc 1991); interpreting statutes, including related provisions, as a whole, Gott v. Dir. of Revenue, 5 S.W.3d 155, 159-60 (Mo. banc 1999); and applying the rules of grammar when they are helpful, see Caplinger v. Rahman, 529 S.W.3d 326, 332 (Mo. Ct. App. 2017).
A.
Applying these principles, the statute authorizes only a single fee for "[s]earch and retrieval," not separate fees for each of these acts. As relevant here, subsection 2 states:
Health care providers may condition the furnishing of the patient's health care records to the patient, the patient's authorized representative or any other person or entity authorized by law to obtain or reproduce such records upon payment of a fee for:
(1)(a) Search and retrieval, in an amount not more than twenty-four dollars and eighty-five cents plus copying in the amount of fifty-seven cents per page for the cost of supplies and labor plus, if the health care provider has contracted for off-site records storage and management, any additional labor costs of outside storage retrieval, not to exceed twenty-three dollars and twenty-six cents, as adjusted annually pursuant to subsection 5 of this section; . . .
(2) Postage, to include packaging and delivery cost; and
(3) Notary fee, not to exceed two dollars, if requested.
Mo. Rev. Stat. § 191.227(2) (Supp. 2017) (emphasis added). Focusing on the critical language, the provider "may condition the furnishing of the patient's health care records . . . upon payment of a fee for: (1) . . . [s]earch and retrieval . . . ; (2) [p]ostage . . . ; and (3) [n]otary fee . . . ."
If this sounds like a list of three fees, it is. Lists with four nouns and two conjunctions cannot contain four separate items.4   They necessarily include one compound item—here, search and retrieval—made up of more than one noun. See Rodney Huddleston & Geoffrey K. Pullum, The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language 1279 (2002) (referring to this type of construction as "layering"). The structure of the statute makes clear that there are three fees, each of which is discussed in a separate paragraph of subsection 2: one for "[s]earch and retrieval," one for "[p]ostage," and one for a "[n]otary." The key takeaway is that only one fee covers the compound item, "[s]earch and retrieval."
B.
If the statute creates a single search-and-retrieval fee, then the focus shifts to whether a health-care provider must complete both actions before it can charge the fee. In the statute, the word "and" separates the two nouns, "search" and "retrieval." In Missouri, there is a strong presumption that "and" is conjunctive, not disjunctive, meaning that it is read as an "and," not as an "or." See Stiers v. Dir. of Revenue, 477 S.W.3d 611, 615 (Mo. banc 2016). This presumption "strong[ly]" suggests that both acts—search and retrieval—must be completed before CIOX can charge the fee. Id. (citation omitted).
Indeed, the Missouri Supreme Court has considered a statute like this one before. In Finnegan v. Old Republic Title Co. of St. Louis, the statute authorized notaries to charge a fee of two dollars "for notarization of each signature and the proper recording thereof in the journal of notarial acts." 246 S.W.3d 928, 929 (Mo. banc. 2008) (quoting Mo. Rev. Stat. § 486.350 (emphasis added)). The plaintiffs sued, arguing that the title company should not have charged them a fee because the notaries did not record anything in their journals. Id. The court agreed and concluded that the fee could only be collected if notaries completed both acts: "notarization" and "proper recording." Id. at 930. The reason, the court said, was that the "use of the word 'and' indicate[d] a legislative intent that recording . . . be an additional requirement to a $2 charge under the statute."5  Id.
I would reach the same conclusion here. To use Finnegan's words, retrieval of a medical record is "an additional requirement to a [$24.85] charge under the statute." Id. CIOX did not retrieve any records, so it was not entitled to payment.
II.
The court disagrees and interprets the statute to allow CIOX to charge the fee, regardless of whether it retrieves anything. It provides two reasons, but neither is persuasive.
The court begins with policy. It asks why the Missouri General Assembly would prohibit health-care providers from charging a fee when they have taken the time to search for records, but by "happenstance . . . there are [no] pre-existing records to be found."6  Ante at 6. It says that such a decision would be "unusual," but even if  this were true, it would not matter because the text is unambiguous. See Kerperien v. Lumberman's Mut. Cas. Co., 100 S.W.3d 778, 781 (Mo. banc 2003) ("Where the language of a statute is unambiguous, courts must give effect to the language used by the legislature.").
But the court's logic falls short on its own terms too. Viewed from the perspective of consumers, this decision is not unusual at all. As a consumer-protection statute, one of its purposes seems to be to protect patients from overcharges. So if a patient requests something, but receives nothing, then it is not odd for the patient to pay nothing. Although this scheme may be unfair to CIOX, it is the result of how the Missouri General Assembly decided to balance the interests of patients and health-care providers in the statute. See Goerlitz v. City of Maryville, 333 S.W.3d 450, 456 (Mo. banc 2011) (discussing the "time-honored principle" that "policy decisions" are left to the legislature). It is not our place to second-guess its judgment. In re Brockmire, 424 S.W.3d 445, 450 (Mo. banc 2014).
The court ends its analysis by relying on subparagraph (1)(b)'s reference to "search, retrieval, and copying fees," but this phrase provides no help either.7  The court believes it provides "a strong textual indication that . . . 'search' fees and 'retrieval' fees [are] distinct." Ante at 6. But this reads too much into a simple cross-reference to the fees found elsewhere "under this section": the "[s]earch and retrieval" fee in subparagraph (1)(a), which includes compensation for copying; and a separate fee, contained in the next subsection, for the "reasonable cost of all duplications of health care record material or information which cannot routinely be copied or duplicated on a standard commercial photocopy machine." Mo. Rev. Stat. § 191.227(2)(1)(a), (3) (Supp. 2017). It does not, in other words, change the only reasonable reading of the statute: CIOX was only entitled to collect a fee from Graham if it conducted a search and retrieved a medical record, the latter of which never occurred here.

 

