).
The overarching issue presented in this case is the scope of an individual's statutory right to counsel during postconviction proceedings. Eason's appointed appellate counsel filed a 24-page brief on his behalf as part of the direct appeal of his conviction. Shortly after Eason's counsel filed the brief, Eason voluntarily dismissed his direct appeal. Two years later, Eason sought the appointment of counsel once again, this time to challenge his conviction in a postconviction proceeding. The question is whether "person[s] convicted of a crime" are entitled to serially challenge their criminal convictions with the benefit of appointed counsel. Minn. Stat. § 590.01, subd. 1 (2016); Minn. Stat. § 590.05 (2016). The court concludes that they are, so long as they are clever enough to dismiss their appeals before their cases are submitted for decision. I disagree.
Minnesota Statutes § 590.05 provides a narrow right to counsel, entitling a postconviction petitioner to "representation by the state public defender. . . . if the person has not already had a direct appeal of the conviction." (Emphasis added.) Rather than focusing on the language of the statute, which is our typical approach in cases  involving a statute, the court substitutes the statutory question for a constitutional one. By doing so, the court has redirected the inquiry from whether the individual requesting counsel has had a direct appeal, which is the actual language in the statute, to whether the direct appeal itself was a "meaningful 'review of a criminal conviction' with the assistance of counsel," which is an entirely different question.
Without this substitution, the court cannot finish in the same place. An individual has had a direct appeal once there has been a "request for such an appeal" as part of a "legal proceeding by which a case is brought from a lower to a higher court for rehearing." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 103 (2002) (defining "appeal"). Under the plain and ordinary meaning of the word "appeal," therefore, a person has "had a direct appeal of the conviction" when counsel has done enough for the appeal to be decided, which occurs when appointed counsel has filed a brief on the person's behalf.1  Only by focusing on the extra-statutory word "review," coupled with another extra-statutory word, "meaningful," can the court reach the conclusion that the statutory right is vindicated only at a later point—often months later—when the case is submitted for decision. The statute therefore does not provide the relief that Eason seeks.
I would end the analysis there because, in my view, this case turns on the plain language of the postconviction appointment-of-counsel statute. But even assuming that this case also presents a constitutional question, the court ventures astray on this question as well by failing to differentiate between the two distinct rights involved: the right to counsel and the right to one meaningful review of a criminal conviction. Article I, Section 6 of the Minnesota Constitution guarantees a criminal defendant the right to "the assistance of counsel in his defense." This court has extended the constitutional right to counsel to include a right to appellate counsel in one review of a criminal conviction, either by direct appeal or by petition for postconviction relief, because appellate review is not meaningful without the assistance of counsel. Deegan v. State, 711 N.W.2d 89, 98 (Minn. 2006).
Relying on Deegan, the court holds that Eason is entitled to counsel in his postconviction proceeding because he did not have "one review" of his conviction in his direct appeal. But not having had one review does not mean that Eason never vindicated his right to counsel. Indeed, Deegan itself recognizes that the two rights are interrelated but distinct: the "right to counsel on appeal may be constitutionally guaranteed even where the right to appellate review is not." Id. at 97 (citing Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U.S. 605, 609-10, 125 S. Ct. 2582, 162 L. Ed. 2d 552 (2005), and Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353, 355-56, 83 S. Ct. 814, 9 L. Ed. 2d 811 (1963)). Deegan further makes clear, through its lengthy discussion  of Douglas v. California, 372 U.S. 353, 83 S. Ct. 814, 9 L. Ed. 2d 811 (1963), that the reason for providing appointed counsel is to give the defendant the benefit of counsel's expertise—through a full review of the record, comprehensive legal research, and skilled drafting of the appellate brief. Deegan, 711 N.W.2d at 98 ("[T]he quality of a defendant's one review as of right of a criminal conviction should not hinge on whether a person can pay for the assistance of counsel." (citing Douglas, 372 U.S. at 355-56)).
Under Deegan's reasoning, Eason vindicated his constitutional right to counsel, even though he opted not to see his direct appeal through to the end. There is no dispute that, on direct appeal, Eason's appointed counsel examined the record, researched the law, and filed a 24-page brief on his behalf. This is all that Deegan requires from counsel to make the review meaningful—nothing more, nothing less. Only by conflating the right to counsel with the right to one review can the court reach the remarkable conclusion that an individual's right to counsel has not been vindicated, no matter how much work appellate counsel has done, until at least one appeal has been submitted for decision.
The court's conclusion is remarkable for another reason. In its search for what it means for a review to be meaningful, the court selects an arbitrary cut-off point: the submission of the case for decision. Before that point, the court reasons, there has been no review, at least not a meaningful one. Yet after that point, even if the reviewing court never makes a decision, the review is somehow meaningful. The court's analysis, however, is inconsistent with the definition of the word "review," which suggests that a review does not occur at all—much less a meaningful one—until an actual "reexamination" takes place. Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1944 (2002); see also The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language 1503 (5th ed. 2011) (defining "review" in the legal context as "[a]n evaluation conducted by a higher court of a decision made or action taken by a lower court to determine whether any error was made" (emphasis added)). The court's incongruent reasoning suggests that the arbitrary cut-off point it selected—the time of submission—may be more of an effort at cabining the effects of its own rule, including the real possibility of gamesmanship, than a serious examination of when individuals have received a meaningful review of their convictions.
This leads to my final point. The decision here is more than just an academic exercise; it has real-world consequences. By holding that Eason's right to counsel has not been vindicated, the court encourages gamesmanship and strains judicial resources. A person convicted of a crime may now file a brief with the benefit of counsel, dismiss the appeal, and yet proceed to have the benefit of appointed counsel on as many petitions for postconviction relief as he or she would like, so long as each appeal is dismissed prior to submission. In fact, under a time-of-submission rule, one could theoretically wait all the way to the point of oral argument and then dismiss the appeal if the argument is not going well. Such a rule defies common sense.
Accordingly, I would conclude that Eason fully vindicated his right to counsel when his appellate counsel filed a brief on his behalf as part of his direct appeal. He was therefore not entitled to the benefit of appointed counsel again in his postconviction proceeding. See Minn. Stat. § 590.05; Ferguson v. State, 826 N.W.2d 808, 816 (Minn. 2013) ("[A] defendant who has been represented by counsel on direct appeal has no right under the Minnesota Constitution  to the assistance of counsel . . . in a subsequent postconviction proceeding.").
I therefore respectfully dissent.
MCKEIG, Justice (dissenting).
I join in the dissent of Justice Stras.

 

