).
This case requires us to determine when, and under what circumstances, police officers have probable cause to perform a chemical test for the presence of controlled substances when they have reason to suspect a driver is under the influence of alcohol. Because the warrant application established probable cause only for the presence of alcohol in Debra Fawcett's blood, not the presence of a controlled substance, I respectfully dissent from the court's conclusion that the search conducted in this case was reasonable under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
I.
By proceeding through a red light, Fawcett drove her vehicle into the path of L.S.'s vehicle. The two vehicles collided, which caused both drivers to sustain injuries. When police officers arrived on the scene and began questioning the participants and witnesses, one of the officers detected alcohol on Fawcett's breath. Fawcett admitted that she had consumed "two to three beers" earlier that day. While Fawcett was in the ambulance receiving treatment for her injuries, an officer recited the implied-consent advisory and asked her to take a test to determine if she was "under the influence of alcohol." He also informed her that he had probable cause to believe that she had "violated the criminal vehicular homicide or injury laws," which meant that a chemical test would be taken "with or without [her] consent." No chemical test was administered at that time.
After Fawcett was transported to the hospital, another officer completed an application for a search warrant accompanied by an affidavit. Nothing in the affidavit suggested that Fawcett was under the influence of anything other than alcohol. In fact, the affidavit specifically stated that "officers [had] formed the belief that . . . Fawcett was . . . under the influence of alcohol" because "Fawcett admitted to responding officers that she had two or three drinks just prior to the crash, she smelled of an alcoholic beverage[,] and it was apparent to officers on-scene that she had been drinking." The judge issued a warrant that allowed a "blood sample to be taken from [Fawcett] at Mercy Hospital" and forwarded "to an approved lab for testing." The warrant was silent on the specific types of tests that law enforcement could conduct on the blood sample.
One month later, the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension ("BCA") reported that there was no ethyl alcohol in Fawcett's blood sample, but that "additional toxicology report(s) [would] follow." A second BCA report indicated that Fawcett's blood sample contained Alprazolam, a prescription medication, and a metabolite of tetrahydrocannabinol ("THC"), an active ingredient of marijuana. An officer then obtained a search warrant for any records with the name "Debra Lee Fawcett" in Minnesota's Prescription Monitoring Program. The search revealed that Fawcett had a valid prescription for Alprazolam at the time of the accident.
The State subsequently filed a criminal complaint against Fawcett alleging that she had committed criminal vehicular operation. Minn. Stat. § 609.21, subd. 1(2)(ii) (2012) (making it a crime to cause injury to another while operating a motor vehicle in a negligent manner while under the influence of a controlled substance). The State's theory of the case was that Fawcett's  combined use of THC and Alprazolam, both controlled substances, violated the criminal-vehicular-operation statute.
After the State filed the complaint, Fawcett filed a motion to suppress "[a]ll evidence of the presence of drugs." The district court granted Fawcett's motion, concluding as relevant here that, under the Fourth Amendment, there was no probable cause to search Fawcett's blood for the presence of controlled substances. The court of appeals reversed, holding that Fawcett did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the contents of her blood sample after it was seized by law enforcement for testing under a search warrant. State v. Fawcett, 877 N.W.2d 555, 561-62 (Minn. App. 2016).
II.
I agree with the court that a search warrant that authorizes law enforcement to seize and test a person's blood for intoxicants does not wipe out a person's reasonable expectation that law enforcement will not test the blood sample for other purposes. The permissible extent of the invasion is tied to the scope of the warrant. See Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 128, 140, 110 S. Ct. 2301, 110 L. Ed. 2d 112 (1990) ("If the scope of the search exceeds that permitted by the terms of a validly issued warrant . . . , the subsequent seizure is unconstitutional without more.").1 
But I disagree with the court's conclusion that probable cause to search for alcohol in a driver's blood necessarily provides the police with probable cause to search for drugs. It is not clear how the court reaches this conclusion, other than the inferences it draws from the affidavit that lead it to conclude that the issuing judge must have found that there was probable cause to search for "intoxicants, whether alcohol, controlled substances, or a combination of alcohol and controlled substances."
The most serious problem with the court's conclusion is that the affidavit is devoid of specific facts that could have led the issuing judge to conclude that probable cause existed to test Fawcett's blood for the presence of controlled substances. Nothing about Fawcett's demeanor, actions, or words suggested that the accident occurred because she was under the influence of a controlled substance. The affidavit did not describe any abnormal physical characteristics, comment on Fawcett's ability to converse with the officers, or note any other behavior that would have given reason to believe that Fawcett was under the influence of another substance in addition to alcohol. To the contrary, two of the facts explicitly relied upon by this  court—the smell of alcohol on Fawcett's breath and the admission that she had been drinking prior to the accident—point exclusively to alcohol as the cause of the accident. In fact, the affidavit specifically states that the "officers formed the belief" that Fawcett was "under the influence of alcohol" at the time of the collision.2  The court asserts that the two remaining facts—the injuries suffered by L.S. and the observation that Fawcett ran a red light—support its conclusion that probable cause to search for controlled substances existed, but the court seems to assume the connection rather than explain it.3 
The court also seems to suggest that the affidavit was sufficient because it stated that law enforcement sought "evidence of the crime of criminal vehicular operation/homicide," which can be committed when an individual is driving under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances, or both. See Minn. Stat. § 609.21, subd. 1(2) (2012). The fact that the affidavit generically references the suspected crime is of little assistance, however, because it reflects only the legal conclusion of the officers and is therefore, at best, "vague and conclusory." See State v. Souto, 578 N.W.2d 744, 749 (Minn. 1998) (holding that the statement in an affidavit that the suspect was involved "in the possession and/or distribution of drugs on a wide scale" was too conclusory to provide support for a search warrant). As the Supreme Court has made clear, "[s]ufficient information must be presented to the magistrate to allow that official to determine probable cause; his action cannot be a mere ratification of the bare conclusions of others." Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S 213, 239, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 76 L. Ed. 2d 527 (1983).
On this record, therefore, I would conclude that the search-warrant application and accompanying affidavit failed to establish probable cause for the search of Fawcett's blood for controlled substances. I therefore respectfully dissent from Part I of the court's opinion.
III.
The court's faulty probable-cause analysis, however, may simply be a product of the arguments of the parties, including the State, which asks us to uphold the search under the wrong branch of Fourth Amendment law. The parties present the question as one of probable cause, but the Supreme Court has recognized that, in  certain circumstances, the good-faith exception does not require the suppression of evidence when law enforcement, without engaging in misconduct, proceeds under a defective search warrant. See United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 915-16, 104 S. Ct. 3405, 82 L. Ed. 2d 677 (1984); State v. Brooks, 838 N.W.2d 563, 574 (Minn. 2013) (Stras, J., concurring). The facts of this case, in particular, suggest that the officers may have relied in good faith on what turned out to be a facially valid, yet constitutionally defective, search warrant, which did not place a limit on the types of tests that law enforcement could conduct on Fawcett's blood sample.4  See Leon, 468 U.S. at 922. Rather than unnaturally stretching the concept of probable cause, as I believe the court does here, in an appropriate case and under the right set of facts, I would be open to considering whether to adopt the good-faith exception in full. See State v. Lindquist, 869 N.W.2d 863, 876 (Minn. 2015) ("[T]he good-faith exception adopted here applies only when law enforcement officers act pursuant to binding appellate precedent." (emphasis added)).
LILLEHAUG, Justice (dissenting).
I join Parts I and II of Justice Stras' dissenting opinion. The search-warrant application and affidavit, on their face, failed to establish probable cause for the search of appellant's blood for controlled substances.
I do not join Part III of Justice Stras' dissent. Justice Stras uses Part III to announce his interest in an issue not raised by the parties and thus not before us: whether the so-called good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule should be expanded.
Although I disagree with Part III, Justice Stras appropriately makes clear (in italics) that, under State v. Lindquist, 869 N.W.2d 863 (Minn. 2015), the exception applies only when officers act pursuant to binding appellate precedent. Lindquist did not adopt United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 104 S. Ct. 3405, 82 L. Ed. 2d 677 (1984), and its progeny, but rather recognized only a "narrow[]" exception that was "a small fragment of federal good-faith jurisprudence," 869 N.W.2d at 876.
HUDSON, Justice (dissenting).
I join in the dissent of Justice Lillehaug.

 

