 and dissenting).
Because the court substitutes itself for the rulemaking process and the district court, I respectfully dissent from the court's decision to grant a new trial to Custom Conveyor.
As the court implicitly recognizes, Minnesota practitioners have long distinguished between depositions intended to discover information for trial and those intended to preserve trial testimony. 1A David F. Herr & Roger S. Haydock, Minnesota Practice—Civil Rules Ann. § 30:7 (5th ed. 2010) ("Depositions are usually taken to discover information, known as discovery depositions, or to preserve evidence, known as depositions taken to preserve testimony."). In light of that distinction, I agree with the court's conclusion that a deadline in a scheduling order for "complet[ing] discovery" does not necessarily apply to taking a deposition for the sole purpose of preserving the testimony of material, out-of-state witnesses who are unavailable for trial. That conclusion should have been the end of the court's analysis.
Yet the court goes further. The court first defines the scope of its holding as limited to depositions taken solely for preserving the trial testimony of unavailable, out-of-state witnesses.1  It then invents a  multi-factor inquiry for district courts to use in determining whether "good cause" exists for the grant of a protective order. By reversing for a new trial through its application of an impromptu, judicially crafted rule rather than adhering to existing rules, the court undermines the rulemaking process. Rulemaking is a job for the rulemaking process.
The court then compounds its error when it applies its new multi-factor inquiry to the issue presented in this case, even though, as the court recognizes, the district court did not have the benefit of our new rule when it rendered its decision.2  Such an approach makes sense when there is only one reasonable conclusion that a district court can reach under the new rule, when we are affirming the decision of the district court in light of the new rule, or when the decision itself is subject to de novo review by this court. In other circumstances, the appropriate disposition is to vacate the decision of the district court and remand to the district court for further proceedings. See Rasmussen v. Two Harbors Fish Co., 832 N.W.2d 790, 799 (Minn. 2013) (remanding to the district court "to reevaluate the evidence using the correct legal standard"); Green v. BMW of N. Am., LLC, 826 N.W.2d 530, 539 (Minn. 2013) (reversing and remanding for further proceedings after holding that district court abused its discretion by applying the wrong legal standard in awarding attorney fees).
In this case, our review of the district court's decision to grant TC/American Monorail's motion for a protective order is for an abuse of discretion. Yet rather than remanding the case to the district court to exercise its discretion, the court usurps the role of the district court by granting a new trial under its new test, even though there is a reasonable argument that Custom Conveyor failed to seek the depositions of the two out-of-state witnesses in a timely manner. Under these circumstances, I would adhere to precedent and remand to the district court.3 

 

