
  CitedAs of: September 19, 2020 9:19 PM Z
BLUHM v. WALSTON
Court of Appeals of Michigan
May 29, 1998, Decided 
No. 202135

Reporter
1998 Mich. App. LEXIS 1631 *; 1998 WL 1991853
 GARRY M. BLUHM, Plaintiff-Appellant, v PATRICK J. WALSTON and LAURA L. WALSTON, Defendants-Appellees.  
Notice:   [*1]  IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MICHIGAN COURT OF APPEALS RULES, UNPUBLISHED OPINIONS ARE NOT PRECEDENTIALLY BINDING UNDER THE RULES OF STARE DECISIS.  
  
Prior History: Oakland Circuit Court. LC No. 96-521685 NO.  
  
Disposition: Reversed and remanded.  
  
Judges: Before: Neff, P.J., and O'Connell and Young, Jr., JJ. Robert P. Young, Jr., J., concurring.    
Opinion




PER CURIAM.
This is a personal injury case based on a theory of premises liability. Plaintiff appeals as of right from the trial court's order granting summary disposition to defendants in reliance on the volunteer doctrine. We reverse and remand for trial.
The facts of this case are strikingly similar to those of Hawkins v Ryder Truck Rental, Inc,     Mich App    ,     NW2d     (Docket No. 199136, issued 3/6/98). At oral argument, counsel for plaintiff and defendants agreed that Hawkins controls this case and requires reversal of the order for summary disposition.
At the request of defendant Patrick Walston, plaintiff agreed to help Walston and others raise a wall in defendants' home. The wall, approximately thirty feet long and complete with paneling, siding and part of the roof, slipped during the effort to lift it into place,  [*2]  injuring plaintiff. Plaintiff sued, claiming status as an invitee and asserting liability for the alleged ordinary negligence of defendants. Defendants claimed that plaintiff was a volunteer and that their only duty to him was to refrain from willful or wanton acts that might injure him. The trial court agreed with defendants' position on the issue of duty and found that plaintiff's claims of ordinary negligence could not sustain his cause of action.
In Hawkins, this Court dealt with the precise issue raised here on facts that make it indistinguishable from this case. The Court held that under Michigan law the volunteer doctrine serves to limit liability only in the context of claims based on respondeat superior, where a master is not liable for the ordinary negligence of his servant who has injured a third person having the [ILLEGIBLE TEXT] status of a volunteer. Id., slip op p 2, citing Diefenbach v Great A & P Tea Co, 280 Mich 507, 512-513; 273 NW2d 583, 273 N.W. 783 (1937). The Court refused to extend the reach of the volunteer doctrine to immunize negligent actors from their own tortious conduct.
We agree with the reasoning and result [*3]  reached by the majority in Hawkins and on its authority reverse and remand this case for trial. 1  We do not retain jurisdiction.
/s/ Janet T. Neff
/s/ Peter D. O'Connell 
Concur by: Robert P. Young, Jr.    
Concur




YOUNG, JR., J. (concurring).
I concur in the result reached by the majority, but write separately to express my opinion that the analysis of the volunteer doctrine found in the concurring opinion issued by Chief Judge CORRIGAN in Hawkins v Ryder Truck Rental, Inc,     Mich App    ;     NW2d     (Docket No. 199136, issued 3/6/98), represents the better view of the status of [*4]  this admittedly muddled area of law. In sum, I disagree with the limitation of the doctrine created by the majority in Hawkins, but believe, for the reasons stated below, that the volunteer doctrine is inapplicable to the facts of this case under any analysis of the controlling Supreme Court authority.
Based upon my review of the Supreme Court authority, I conclude that Diefenbach v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, 280 Mich 507; 273 NW 783 (1937), has not been overruled and does not limit the volunteer doctrine only to those instances in which respondeat superior liability is at issue. However, defendants admit in their appellate brief that defendant Patrick Walston "solicited the assistance of Plaintiff and others to raise a wall." Because Walston admittedly invited plaintiff to participate, I do not believe that the volunteer doctrine can apply at all under these circumstances. See Hawkins, supra, slip op p 4 n 2 (CORRIGAN, C.J., concurring). As I construct the controlling Supreme Court authority, it appears that only truly gratuitous undertakings (e.g., activities approaching "officious intermeddling") are covered by the volunteer doctrine. 
 [*5]  Thus, apart from my obligation to follow what I believe to be the flawed analysis of the Hawkins majority opinion, I would reverse the trial court's decision and remand for trial on this alternative ground.
/s/ Robert P. Young, Jr.  

 

End of Document
