
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 9:20 PM Z
In re Moore
Supreme Court of Michigan
August 19, 2002, Decided 
SC: 122005

Reporter
650 N.W.2d 323 *; 2002 Mich. LEXIS 1482 **
 In Re HON. WARFIELD MOORE, Judge of the Third Circuit Court, Detroit, Michigan.  
Prior History:  [**1]  JTC: Formal Complaint No. 69.  
  
Disposition: Petition for the appointment of a master is GRANTED.  
  
Judges: Weaver, J., concurs. Young, J., concurs. Corrigan, C.J., joins in the concurring statement of Justice Young. Markman, J., dissents.    
Opinion




 [*323]  On order of the Court, the petition for the appointment of a master is considered, and it is GRANTED. The Honorable Karl V. Fink, Retired Judge of Washtenaw Circuit Court, is designated as master to consider Formal Complaint No 69.  
Concur by: Weaver; Young  
Concur




Weaver, J., concurs and states as follows:
I concur in the order because under MCR 9.210(B) this Court is apparently required to appoint a master upon request by the Judicial Tenure Commission. However, this case draws the validity of the rule into question. In proceedings related to Formal Complaint No. 58, the commission filed in October 2000 a recommendation for discipline. The recommendation pertained to eight separate cases over which the respondent judge had presided. Examining these examples of his performance, we found a "pattern" of intemperate behavior. We suspended him for six months without pay and challenged him to improve the manner in which he conducted himself.  In re Moore, 464 Mich. 98, 626 N.W.2d 374 (2001). In issuing that [**2]  sanction, we recognized that "the purpose of judicial discipline is not to punish but to maintain the integrity of the judicial process." Id. at 118. Presumably that would be accomplished if Judge Moore's deportment on the bench after imposition of the last sanction conformed in every way with the canons of judicial ethics. Now, without an indication that Judge Moore's conduct has been less than proper since the sanction, we are asked to appoint a master to examine allegations of misconduct similar to those for which Judge Moore was sanctioned and occurring before the sanction. Common sense and discretion suggest that appointment of a master is not appropriate under the information before us. 
Whether or not this Court appoints a master does not inhibit or prohibit the Judicial Tenure Commission from investigating and proceeding with its constitutional authority and responsibility. The commission is still permitted to proceed with its own hearing, MCR 9.210(A), MCR 9.211, and may still present this Court with a recommendation, which this Court may accept, reject, or modify. 1 
 [**3]  The Court should hold public hearings to consider whether to exercise its rulemaking authority 2  and amend MCR 9.210(B). It should examine whether this Court should be bound to appoint a master in every instance that one is requested by the Judicial Tenure Commission, and whether the current time limits are appropriate. 3 
 [*324]  Young, J., concurs and states as follows: 
Because I read MCR 9.210(B) as requiring that this Court appoint a master upon request of the Judicial Tenure Commission, I concur in the order. However, I also believe that the statements of Justices Weaver and Markman raise very important questions that merit serious consideration by the Judicial Tenure [**4]  Commission. 
Corrigan, C.J., joins in the concurring statement of Justice Young.  
Dissent by: Markman  
Dissent




Markman, J., dissents and states as follows: 
I respectfully choose not to grant the request of the Judicial Tenure Commission (JTC) to appoint a master to investigate certain allegations of misconduct against Judge Warfield Moore. 1  Instead, I would direct the JTC to explain why Judge Moore should now be faced with discipline for alleged misconduct predating this Court's earlier discipline of him and, with one exception, even predating the earlier JTC recommendation for discipline. In my judgment, the allegations here are entirely cumulative of the allegations set forth by the JTC in its recommendation in October 2000 that resulted in a six-month suspension without pay in May 2001.  In re Moore, 464 Mich. 98, 626 N.W.2d 374 (2001).
 [**5]  This Court's previous discipline of Judge Moore, in which I joined, was predicated upon findings of misconduct by Judge Moore occurring in the course of eight separate trials. We concluded that Judge Moore's conduct demonstrated a "pattern of persistent interference in and frequent interruption of the trial of cases; impatient, discourteous, critical, and sometimes severe attitudes toward jurors, witnesses, counsel, and others in the courtroom; and use of a controversial tone and manner in addressing litigants, jurors, witnesses, and counsel." Id. at 132-133. We further concluded that, "while the incidents vary in severity and some may ostensibly seem innocuous," judicial misconduct may be proven by such incidents where they produce a "pattern of hostile conduct unbecoming a member of the judiciary." Id. at 132. The present allegations of misconduct raised by the JTC are clearly a part of the same "pattern" of misconduct by Judge Moore. Such allegations involve exactly the same type of courtroom misconduct as in the recommendation of October 2000, and such allegations undoubtedly would have been joined in this recommendation had the JTC been aware of them at the time. Had [**6]  the latter occurred, proof of the same type of misconduct by Judge Moore in nine, rather than eight, trials, would almost certainly have resulted in the same discipline  [*325]  of a six-month suspension by this Court, at least in my judgment. 2  
 [**7]  Concerning the JTC's sole allegation of misconduct by Judge Moore arising after the recommendation of October 2000 (but before this Court's discipline)---consisting of a very brief exchange between Judge Moore and an attorney who was moving his disqualification (which motion was granted)---I view this, at worst, as more of the same, part of the same "pattern" of misconduct by Judge Moore that served as the basis for his discipline. Even assuming that such alleged misconduct cannot be seen as part of the same "pattern," I hardly see a need to appoint a master to investigate what amounted to an estimated one-minute courtroom exchange. If the JTC deems this exchange worthy of investigation, I am confident that it can carry out such investigation without having to employ the financial and other resources of a master. 3 
 [**8]  I recognize that "double jeopardy" is inapposite in the judicial discipline context, and that there is no doctrine of "res judicata" that bars the present JTC request. However, I believe that it is fundamentally unfair that Judge Moore should have to face discipline once again for misconduct that predated this Court's previous discipline, and that was clearly a part of the same "pattern" of misconduct underlying that discipline. 
I choose to exercise the judgment to which I believe members of this Court are entitled under MCR 9.210(B) to deny at this time the request of the JTC to impose what appears to be a second discipline on Judge Moore for the same misconduct. He has already been disciplined once, quite severely and quite properly, for a "pattern" of misconduct. He should not now again be faced with discipline for conduct that is unquestionably a part of this same "pattern," and that predated his discipline by this Court. Rather, now that his six-month suspension without pay has been served, he is entitled to a fresh start. 4 
 [**9]  

 

End of Document
