
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 9:20 PM Z
Kircher v. Steinberg
Supreme Court of Michigan
August 1, 2002, Decided 
SC: 120786

Reporter
2002 Mich. LEXIS 1428 *; 467 Mich. 858; 648 N.W.2d 647
 DAVID J. KIRCHER, Plaintiff-Appellant, v RONALD A. STEINBERG, Defendant-Appellee.  
Prior History:  [*1]  COA: 224781. Oakland CC: 99-014959-NZ.  
  
Judges: Corrigan, C.J., joins in the statement of Young, Jr., J. Young, Jr., J., dissents. Corrigan, C.J., joins in the statement of Young, Jr., J.    
Opinion




On order of the Court, the delayed application for leave to appeal from the November 20, 2001 decision of the Court of Appeals is considered, and, pursuant to MCR 7.302(F)(1), in lieu of granting leave to appeal, we REMAND the matter to the Court of Appeals for explication of the reasons for awarding sanctions for a vexatious appeal. 
We retain jurisdiction.  
Dissent by: Young, Jr.    
Dissent




Young, Jr., J., dissents and states as follows:
I dissent from the majority's order remanding to the Court of Appeals for articulation of the reasons for imposing sanctions. I would deny leave to appeal because the decision to award sanctions was based on manifestly obvious reasons. To recapitulate plaintiff's claim is to recognize its utter frivolousness.
After a default judgment was entered against him in a preceding civil lawsuit, plaintiff brought the instant claims of abuse of process and "due process violations" against the opposing counsel in the prior action, based on counsel's conduct in obtaining an order permitting [*2]  substituted service in that action. The trial court granted defendant's motion for summary judgment, correctly observing that there was "absolutely no cause of action [against the] attorney as a third party." On plaintiff's appeal, the Court of Appeals affirmed and granted defendant's motion for fees pursuant to MCR 7.211, 7.216 against plaintiff for filing a vexatious appeal.
As stated, plaintiff's complaint lacks merit and is frivolous on its face. Therefore, in my view, it is consummately absurd to remand a matter so obvious to the Court of Appeals for an articulation of the fact that plaintiff's claim and appeal were frivolous. If this appeal is not one in which sanctions are appropriately awarded, I simply cannot imagine what kind of case would justify such an award.
Corrigan, C.J., joins in the statement of Young, Jr., J.  

 

End of Document
