
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 9:20 PM Z
People v. Dowdy
Supreme Court of Michigan
August 6, 2009, Decided
SC: 138351

Reporter
484 Mich. 855 *; 769 N.W.2d 648 **; 2009 Mich. LEXIS 1802 ***
 PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF MICHIGAN, Plaintiff-Appellant, v RANDALL LEE DOWDY, Defendant-Appellee.  
Subsequent History: On remand at People v. Dowdy, 287 Mich. App. 278, 787 N.W.2d 131, 2010 Mich. App. LEXIS 214 (2010)  
Prior History:  [***1] COA: 287689. Ingham CC: 08-000249-FH.
People v. Dowdy, 148 Mich. App. 517, 384 N.W.2d 820, 1986 Mich. App. LEXIS 2394 (1986)  
Judges: Marilyn Kelly, Chief Justice. Michael F. Cavanagh, Elizabeth A. Weaver, Maura D. Corrigan, Robert P. Young, Jr., Stephen J. Markman, Diane M. Hathaway, Justices. KELLY, C.J. (concurring). YOUNG, J. (concurring). CORRIGAN, J. and MARKMAN, J., join the statement of YOUNG, J. HATHAWAY, J. (dissenting).  
Opinion




  [*855]   [**648]  Order
On order of the Court, the application for leave to appeal the February 12, 2009 [**649]  order of the Court of Appeals is considered and, pursuant to MCR 7.302(H)(1), in lieu of granting leave to appeal, we REMAND this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration as on leave granted.
Concur by: KELLY; YOUNG  
Concur




KELLY, C.J. (concurring).
I concur in this Court's order remanding the case to the Court of Appeals for consideration as on leave granted because there is no published caselaw governing the unusual factual circumstances presented. Justice Young generously puts forth a blueprint showing how the Court of Appeals could decide the matter. But, I question whether the pertinent section of the Sex Offenders Registration Act 1  (SORA) can be applied to defendant given that he was unable to register a residence. A person cannot be criminally liable for failing to do  [*856]  an act  [***2] that he or she is incapable of performing. 2  Therefore, it appears that the circuit court may have properly dismissed the charges against defendant.
Defendant was convicted of crimes that required him to register and report under SORA. Upon his release from prison, he resided at the Volunteers of America (VOA) shelter in Lansing. He properly registered the VOA shelter address through the Department of Corrections before his release from prison. 3  After living at the VOA for about four years, defendant was told that he could no longer stay there because of the shelter's policy to refuse services to convicted sex offenders.
Because defendant registered no other address, he was charged with four counts of violating SORA: (1) one count of failing to register  [***4] (a felony), 4  (2) two counts of failing to comply with reporting duties (a misdemeanor), 5  and (3) one count of refusing or failing to pay a registration fee (a misdemeanor). 6  The district court bound [**650]  him over for [*857]  trial as charged. The circuit court determined that it was impossible for defendant to comply with the SORA requirements and dismissed the charges. Because all four charges against defendant have a willfulness requirement, he cannot be guilty of any of them unless he acted willfully.
The pertinent provision of SORA is MCL 28.725(1). It reads:
An individual required to be registered under this  [***5] act shall notify the local law enforcement agency or sheriff's department having jurisdiction where his or her new residence or domicile is located or the department post of the individual's new residence or domicile within 10 days after the individual changes or vacates his or her residence, domicile, or place of work or education, including any change required to be reported under [MCL 28.724a (emphasis added).]
The felony charge against defendant is premised on the fact that he failed to register a new residence. SORA defines residence as "that place at which a person habitually sleeps, keeps his or her personal effects, and has a regular place of lodging." 7  It does not appear that the defendant had a new residence to register once the VOA required him to leave the shelter. Underpasses and park benches may be the places where defendant "habitually sleeps" but they hardly qualify as a "regular place of lodging" under the statute.
It seems unreasonable to interpret the statute to require that a homeless person register wherever his or her cardboard box happens to be set up for the night. 8  City street corners fail to meet the statutory definition of  [***6] residence. First, a defendant must habitually sleep somewhere for it to be a residence. 9  For something to be habitual, it must be more than a random occurrence or event. 10  Second, a place must be a regular place of lodging to qualify as a residence. Again, defendant does [*858]  not have a regular place of lodging if he is nomadically moving around the city depending on the weather, availability of food, shelter, and other resources.
Moreover, SORA prohibits a defendant from registering an address that is not his or her true residence. 11  A defendant cannot register a place as his or her residence unless  [***7] that place qualifies as a residence under the act. Defendant in this case would have violated the act by registering an address, such as a temporary park bench, because a temporary park bench does not meet the statutory requirement for a residence. Justice Young's interpretation of the statute creates a Catch-22 situation, which would force defendant either to report a false residence and violate SORA, or do nothing and violate SORA.  [**651]  Either way, it is impossible for him to comply with the statute.
A defendant should not be excused from SORA requirements for willfully avoiding the registration requirement by failing to establish a residence. However, a defendant cannot be held to violate the act where he cannot comply. Even if defendant in this case had registered "Greater Lansing Area" with the police, this would not satisfy the residency requirements of SORA. He simply had no residence to register. And nothing indicates that he failed to establish a residence, shuffling from park bench to highway to underpass to cardboard box, in an attempt to avoid the registration requirements of SORA.
Therefore, I believe that the circuit court may have correctly dismissed the charges  [***8] against defendant because it was impossible for him to comply with SORA.
YOUNG, J. (concurring).
I concur in this Court's order remanding this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration as on leave granted. I write separately to express my belief that the circuit court erred in dismissing the various charges brought against defendant. Contrary to the expostulations of Chief Justice Kelly and Justice Hathaway, defendant was not charged with violating the Sex Offenders Registration Act (SORA) 12  because he is homeless or lacks a permanent residence. Rather, the criminal charges lodged against defendant are premised upon the fact that he made absolutely no effort to comply with the quarterly reporting requirements of the SORA for three years.
Defendant is a convicted sex offender who has been homeless since his release from prison in 2002. When defendant initially registered under SORA, he falsely provided the address of the soup kitchen where he ate meals but did not reside. Defendant last reported this address in 2003, and has not reported or updated his address since. 13  
 [*859]  Defendant was charged with one felony count and three misdemeanor counts relating to his failure to report in person to a local law enforcement agency on a quarterly basis, to update his residence information, and his failure to pay a reporting fee in violation of SORA. The district court bound defendant over for trial as charged. The circuit court dismissed the charges because it could not "see how a  [***10] homeless person" "with no place to go" could "comply with the terms of the act." The prosecution appealed to the Court of Appeals, which denied leave to appeal.
I believe that the circuit court erred in dismissing the charges against defendant. MCL 28.725a(3) and (4) 14  require a convicted [**652]  sex offender to report to the local law enforcement agency in the county in which he "is domiciled or resides" 15  on a quarterly basis. These provisions require the [*860]  individual to provide proof of domicile or residence and update any information that must be provided by statute. MCL 28.725(1) further provides that upon changing or vacating a residence or domicile, the individual must notify the agency of the new residence or domicile within 10 days. The burden then shifts to the agency to verify the information provided. 16  
Certainly, there was nothing preventing defendant from complying with the reporting requirements of MCL 28.725a(3) and (4) and informing law enforcement of his current living arrangements. It is undisputed that defendant had not reported to any police agency since 2003. Contrary to Chief Justice Kelly and Justice Hathaway's contentions, there is nothing "absurd" about the state's requirement that persons convicted of sexual crimes periodically inform the police of their living arrangements, even if they are homeless. The registration requirements of SORA "are intended to provide law enforcement and the people of this state with an appropriate, comprehensive, and effective means to monitor those persons who pose such a potential danger." MCL 28.721a. Law enforcement's knowledge that a homeless sexual offender is residing in a city park, an abandoned building, 17  or within 1000 feet of school property 18  undoubtedly provides the police with the ability to monitor predators and protect the public.
SORA requires a sex offender to provide proof of his residence or domicile, but does not identify any exclusive method of providing such proof. While defendant's homelessness may have provided unusual problems in proving his residence, the statute expressly contemplates atypical living arrangements, permitting the State Police to specify other satisfactory means of proving proof of domicile or residence. MCL 28.725a(8) provides:
An individual required to be registered under this act shall maintain either  [**653]  a valid operator's or chauffeur's license issued under the Michigan vehicle code . . . or an official state personal identification card . . . with the individual's current address. The license or card may be used as proof of domicile or residence under this section. In addition, the officer or authorized employee may require the individual to produce another document bearing his or [*861]  her name and address, including,  [***14] but not limited to, voter registration or a utility or other bill. The department may specify other satisfactory proof of domicile or residence. [Emphasis added.]
In the event that a sex offender reported to the local law enforcement agency and was truly unable to provide any of the statutorily enumerated documents to prove his residence or domicile, the duty would fall to the state police to devise some alternate verification method. Contrary to Justice Kelly's assertion, my interpretation of the statute does not "create[] a Catch-22 situation." A defendant is required to report in person to the local police and notify the police of his residence or domicile, wherever that may be. The burden then shifts to the law enforcement agency and the state police to decide how to verify the defendant's whereabouts for purposes of SORA. 19  I see nothing in SORA that authorizes the state to penalize a defendant merely for being homeless; rather, the statute penalizes the defendant's failure to report his residence or domicile with law enforcement. Accordingly, I concur in this Court's order remanding this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration as on leave granted.
CORRIGAN,  [***15] J. and MARKMAN, J., join the statement of YOUNG, J.
Dissent by: HATHAWAY  
Dissent




HATHAWAY, J. (dissenting).
I would deny leave to appeal because I believe that the prosecutor failed to present sufficient evidence to bind defendant over for trial on the charges. The prosecutor claims on appeal that the trial court erred in dismissing the charges against defendant. Specifically, defendant was charged with the following four counts related to his alleged failure to comply with the Sex Offenders Registration Act (SORA), MCL 28.721 et seq.: (1) failure to inform authorities of a new address as required by MCL 28.725(1); (2) and (3) failure to verify an address quarterly in violation of MCL 28.725a; and (4) failure to pay the registration fee within 90 days of reporting, in violation of MCL 28.725a(7) or MCL 28.727(1).
In order to sustain any of the counts, the prosecution must demonstrate that, during the period alleged in the information, defendant had a residence or domicile as defined by the statute. See MCL 28.725(1); MCL 28.725a; MCL 28.727. 20  SORA defines "residence" as "that place at which a person habitually sleeps, keeps his or her personal effects, and has a regular place of lodging." MCL 28.722(g).  [***16] Though SORA does not define "domicile," the word is generally taken to mean a place where a [*862]  person has his or her true, fixed and permanent home and principal [**654]  establishment, to which, whenever absent therefrom, he or she intends to return. See MCL 141.609(1); Hartzler v Radeka, 265 Mich 451, 452; 251 N.W. 554 (1933).
The entirety of the prosecutor's proofs consisted of allegations that defendant, a homeless person, registered his address as the Volunteers of America shelter upon being discharged from prison, then left the shelter in 2006 without registering or  [***17] reporting a new address. It is not clear whether the prosecutor is alleging that defendant actually resided at the shelter during the relevant period or merely received services, such as food, at the shelter. Assuming that the prosecutor is alleging that defendant merely received services at the shelter and did not actually "reside" there as defined by the statute, the prosecutor has failed to establish that defendant had a residence or domicile during the relevant period. If the prosecutor cannot demonstrate the existence of a residence or domicile, all four charges against defendant must be dismissed because each is premised on having a residence or domicile. 21  
Assuming that the prosecution is alleging that defendant resided at the shelter during the  [***18] relevant period, and thus was required to register and periodically report that address, it presents insufficient evidence on the matter. The manager of the shelter testified at the preliminary examination that defendant received services at the shelter until November 2006, when he was asked to leave. For his part, defendant maintains that, since his release from prison, he has been homeless and wanders from place to place-such as abandoned buildings, parks, and shelters--every day or two. Although it might well be stated that defendant "stayed" at the shelter in question for a period, such a bare assertion does not establish a domicile or residence under the statute. The prosecutor has the burden of presenting evidence on every element of the offense. The record evidence indicates that the prosecutor has failed to do so. The trial court recognized that the prosecution presented insufficient evidence of a residence or domicile as defined in the statute and dismissed the charges. The Court of Appeals denied leave, and I would as well. 22  
 [*863]  In closing, I note that the purpose of SORA is wise. Consequently, I would urge the Legislature to follow the lead of many other states in formulating a provision with which a homeless person who does not have a domicile or residence could readily comply.

 

End of Document
