
  WarningAs of: September 19, 2020 9:20 PM Z
People v. Wallace
Court of Appeals of Michigan
April 15, 1997, Decided 
No. 178917

Reporter
1997 Mich. App. LEXIS 2845 *; 1997 WL 33350552
 PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF MICHIGAN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v RICHARD ALONZO WALLACE JR., Defendant-Appellant.  
Notice:   [*1]  IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MICHIGAN COURT OF APPEALS RULES, UNPUBLISHED OPINIONS ARE NOT PRECEDENTIALLY BINDING UNDER THE RULES OF STARE DECISIS.  
  
Subsequent History: Decision reached on appeal by People v. Wallace, 454 Mich. 902, 564 N.W.2d 43, 1997 Mich. LEXIS 857 (1997)
Reversed by People v. Wallace, 456 Mich. 855, 568 N.W.2d 681, 1997 Mich. LEXIS 2065 (1997)  
Prior History: No. 178917, Detroit Recorder's Court. LC No. 93-013871.
No. 178917, Wayne Circuit Court. LC No. 93-031871.  
Disposition: Reversed and remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
  
Judges: Before: Wahls, P.J., and Young and H.A. Beach, *  JJ. Robert P. Young, Jr., J., dissenting.  
Opinion




Detroit Recorder's Court
PER CURIAM.
A jury convicted defendant of second-degree murder, MCL 750.317; MSA 28.549. Subsequently, defendant pleaded guilty to being a fourth habitual offender, MCL 769.12; MSA 28.424(2). The trial court sentenced defendant to a term of fifteen to thirty years' imprisonment for the murder conviction. That sentence was vacated, and defendant was sentenced to a term of twenty to forty years' imprisonment as an habitual offender. Defendant appeals as of right. We reverse.
Defendant argues that the trial court erred by failing to instruct the jury that deadly force could be used to resist a sexual [*2]  assault. We agree.
Even when a trial court gives the standard jury instructions on self-defense, it should additionally instruct the jury that a person may use deadly force in self-defense to repel a criminal sexual assault when confronted with force that the person reasonably believes could result in imminent death or serious bodily harm. People v Landrum, sub nom People v Heflin, 434 Mich 482, 512; 456 NW2d 10 (1990). However, because defendant did not request this additional instruction and because there was no objection to the jury instructions that were given at trial, we will only reverse the decision of the trial court if it resulted in manifest injustice. People v Van Dorsten, 441 Mich 540, 544-545; 494 NW2d 737 (1993); Landrum, supra, p 513.
The error here in omitting the additional instruction was not harmless. In People v Barker, 437 Mich 161, 164; 468 NW2d 492 (1991), the Michigan Supreme Court found that the trial court's omission of an instruction on the right to use deadly force to thwart a sexual assault was harmless, holding that "no reasonable juror could have believed [*3]  such force was necessary to prevent rape by the enfeebled deceased." In that case, the decedent was eighty-one years old, walked with a cane, and was described as being unsteady on his feet. Id. The defendant was in her early twenties, five feet, seven inches tall, and weighed 170 pounds. Id. The defendant in that case bludgeoned the deceased ten times and stabbed him thirty-two times. Id.
Here, in contrast, the facts are different. Defendant was forty-five years old, five feet, nine inches tall, weighed 150 pounds, and had a broken left wrist at the time of the incident. Complainant was twenty-eight years old, was taller and heavier than defendant, and was in good health at the time of his death. The decedent died of multiple blunt impact injuries to the head. In contrast to Barker, a reasonable juror here could have believed that the amount of force used was necessary to prevent a sexual assault.
The facts here are also distinguishable from those in Landrum, supra. In both this case and Landrum, the trial court read the standard jury instructions on self-defense. However, in cases involving the use of deadly force to defend against rape, the traditional [*4]  instructions do not totally and accurately present the crucial issue to the jury. See People v Moye, 194 Mich App 373, 379; 487 NW2d 777 (1992), rev'd on other grounds 441 Mich 864; 491 NW2d 232 (1992). The danger in the standard self-defense instructions is that a juror might not consider a threat of a sexual assault to be a threat of bodily harm. Landrum, supra, pp 527 (Archer, J., dissenting), 558 (Levin, J., dissenting); People v Barker, 179 Mich App 702, 711; 468 NW2d 492 (1991) (Marilyn Kelly, J., concurring), aff'd ["for the reasons stated in Judge Marilyn Kelly's concurring opinion"] 437 Mich 161; 468 NW2d 492 (1991).
In Landrum, supra, p 514, the Court held that no manifest injustice was caused by the failure to give the additional instruction because of a variety of factors. However, the Court's opinion focuses on arguments made by the defense counsel. See id., pp 513-514. In particular, the Court relied on the fact that the defense counsel focused his voir dire inquiry on the issue of whether any potential juror would have difficulty in returning [*5]  a verdict of not guilty if the defendant had used deadly force in her self-defense to defend against a rapist. Id., p 513. In addition, defense counsel made the following remarks during closing argument:
I asked you, ladies and gentlemen, is there any question in the minds of any one of you as to whether there could be a rape or an attempted rape of a prostitute and you all indicated by your silence that yes, there can be, and you are right. I asked you if there was any question in your mind as to whether or not rape is an act of great bodily harm. I submit to you that each of you, using your common sense, would definitely say yes. The rape of any woman, ladies and gentlemen, can cause her not only great bodily harm and mental harm, but it may last for a lifetime.
* * *
There is no question but that Henry Green Thomas died and is a probability that he, himself, fell in the tub and there is also that reasonable possibility that the acts of Celestine Landrum, what she did, may have caused or contributed to the death of Henry Green Thomas. What she did, did she have a right to do? There again, I stated to you that defending herself against a rape or an attempted  [*6]   rape is an absolute right and if she did so in order to prevent that rape or in order to prevent great bodily harm, the Court will instruct you that then she had a right to do anything that she could do even to the point of taking a life. [Id., pp 513-514. Emphasis in original.]
Here, we have not been provided with a transcript of defense counsel's voir dire. Accordingly, we can not use counsel's voir dire to analyze whether the jury was adequately instructed of defendant's theory of the case. During closing argument, the closest that defense counsel came to making a statement similar to the one made by counsel in Landrum was the following statement:
Now you will hear an instruction on self-defense that the judge will give you, and the judge will tell you in that instruction that that if Mr. Wallace has a reasonable belief that something is going to happen to him -- and he told you that he believed that he was going to be penetrated sexually or sodomized -- that he has a right to protect himself.
In contrast to the statement in Landrum, this statement did a poor job of instructing the jury of defendant's theory of the case. Defense counsel in Landrum [*7]  made the crucial argument that acts of sexual assault can cause great bodily harm. Specifically, counsel stated:
I asked you if there was any question in your mind as to whether or not rape is an act of great bodily harm. I submit to you that each of you, using your common sense, would definitely say yes. The rape of any woman, ladies and gentlemen, can cause her not only great bodily harm and mental harm, but it may last for a lifetime."
Here, defense counsel made no connection at all between sexual assault and great bodily harm. This is precisely the reason that the standard jury instructions on self-defense are inadequate. Landrum, supra, pp 527 (Archer, J., dissenting), 558 (Levin, J., dissenting); Barker, supra, 179 Mich App 702, 711 (Marilyn Kelly, J., concurring).
The second critical distinction between this case and Landrum is that counsel in Landrum stated exactly how a defendant confronted with the appropriate level of danger may legally respond. First, counsel in Landrum stated, "defending herself against a rape or an attempted rape is an absolute right." Landrum, supra, p 513. Counsel continued that the defendant "had [*8]  a right to do anything that she could do even to the point of taking a life." Id., p 514. In contrast, defense counsel here never made such a statement. Rather, she merely said that defendant "has a right to protect himself." This argument begs the question of whether a defendant may appropriately use deadly force in an effort to "protect himself." Although we would hesitate normally to focus on the inadequacy of defense counsel's statements in holding that a new trial must be conducted, such an analysis is mandated under Landrum. Id., p 514.
The dissent focuses on other arguments by defense counsel which supported defendant's theory of the case. However, aside from the portion of counsel's closing argument which was cited supra, the arguments cited by the dissent all concerned the factual basis of defendant's theory. These arguments as to the factual basis of defendant's theory did nothing to present the jury with the legal underpinnings of defendant's theory, namely that 1) a threat of sexual assault can be equated with a threat of serious bodily harm, and 2) deadly force can be used to prevent an act of rape. We hold that, under the facts of this case, the trial [*9]  court's instructions did not adequately present defendant's theory of the case, and that such failure caused manifest injustice. Accordingly, we reverse defendant's conviction and remand for a new trial.
We briefly address defendant's remaining allegations of error. First, contrary to the cases which defendant cites, the jury instruction here on defendant's state of mind properly stated that the jury may infer malice from the circumstances of the killing, not that it must. Second, there is no evidence that the judge had information about the crime that was not presented to the jury. Accordingly, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in scoring offense variable 3 consistent with the jury verdict. Michigan Sentencing Guidelines, p 77, Instruction A (2d ed, 1988). Third, although a prosecutor may not make a closing argument which does little more than appeal to a juror's sympathy, People v Siler, 171 Mich App 246, 258; 429 NW2d 865 (1988), the prosecutor here did not ask the jury to suspend its judgment and decide the case based on sympathy.  People v Hoffman, 205 Mich App 1, 21; 518 NW2d 817 (1994). Fourth, the [*10]  prosecutor's closing argument did not improperly express a personal belief in defendant's guilt.  People v Stacy, 193 Mich App 19, 36-37; 484 NW2d 675 (1992); People v Jansson, 116 Mich App 674, 693-694; 323 NW2d 508 (1982). Finally, the trial court did not err in failing to obtain defendant's personal consent to the waiver of the production of endorsed witnesses.  People v Johnson, 70 Mich App 349, 350; 247 NW2d 310 (1976).
Reversed and remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
/s/ Myron H. Wahls
/s/ Harry A. Beach 
Dissent by: Robert P. Young, Jr.    
Dissent




Wayne Circuit Court
YOUNG, J. (DISSENTING).
I respectfully dissent. The trial court's failure to give a sua sponte modified self-defense instruction related to fear of criminal sexual conduct does not, under the facts of this case, constitute manifest injustice. Hence, I would affirm.
Unlike the majority, I find this case indistinguishable from People v Landrum, 434 Mich 482; 456 NW2d 10 (1990), the companion case to People v Heflin, 434 Mich 482; 456 NW2d 10 (1990). [*11]  Landrum's defense counsel did not object when the trial court read the standard jury instruction on self-defense nor did he request a special jury instruction. To determine whether the absence of a sua sponte modified instruction on self-defense constituted manifest injustice, the Court reviewed the defense counsel's voir dire and closing argument. Landrum, 434 Mich 513-514. In voir dire, Landrum's defense counsel questioned potential jurors whether they had any doubt that rape is an act of great bodily harm. Id., 513. In closing, Landrum's defense counsel argued that his client was defending herself against a rape which gave her an absolute right to prevent rape or great bodily harm, and that the trial court would instruct jurors that she had a right to do anything to protect herself even to the point of taking a life.  Id., 514. The Court noted that these statements in conjunction with the trial court's self-defense instruction adequately presented the defendant's theory of her case to the jury. Id. Therefore, the Court held that absence of a sua sponte modified instruction on self-defense did not constitute manifest injustice. [*12]  Id.
As in Landrum, defendant's counsel did not object when the court read the standard jury instruction on self-defense nor did she request a special instruction. Unquestionably, the theory of defense was that defendant struck and killed the decedent in an effort to repel the decedent's homosexual attempted rape. Defendant testified at length about the attack and his relative disadvantage, given his broken hand and decedent's larger size and aggression initiated while defendant was asleep. The jury was well aware, based upon defendant's testimony, that self-defense was his principle answer to the charges brought against him. Moreover, in closing, defense counsel made arguments similar to those made by Landrum's defense counsel. The majority suggests that this case is distinguishable from Landrum because defense counsel in this case made only one statement in closing relevant to defendant's claim of self-defense. On the contrary, a fair reading of defense counsel's closing argument indicates that defense counsel argued as, if not more, vigorously than the defense counsel in Landrum that defendant was only defending himself against a sexual assault.
In fact, defense [*13]  counsel made the following salient points in support of defendant's claim of self-defense. She emphasized that defendant was terrorized when the larger, stronger, and younger decedent attempted to have sex with defendant. Counsel explained that, in response to this terror, defendant grabbed the first object within reach to fend off decedent's advances and escape his grasp. Finally, she emphasized that "this is nothing more than a case of self-defense. . . . The judge will tell you . . . that if Mr. Wallace has a reasonable belief that something is going to happen -- that he is going to be sexually penetrated or sodomized -- that he has a right to protect himself."
As such, the theory of the defense was put squarely to the jury. I find that the facts of this case fall squarely within the Supreme Court's holding in Landrum. Consequently, I would hold that the trial court's failure sua sponte to provide a modified self-defense instruction did not result in manifest injustice, and that defendant's conviction and sentence should be affirmed.
/s/ Robert P. Young, Jr.  

 

End of Document
