
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 9:20 PM Z
Progressive Mich. Ins. Co. v. Smith
Supreme Court of Michigan
December 29, 2011, Decided
SC: 141255

Reporter
490 Mich. 977 *; 806 N.W.2d 494 **; 2011 Mich. LEXIS 2394 ***
 PROGRESSIVE MICHIGAN INSURANCE COMPANY, Plaintiff-Appellant, v WILLIAM SMITH and SHERI HARRIS, Defendants, and SCOTT MIHELSIC and ANDREA MIHELSIC, Defendants-Appellees, and PIONEER STATE MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Intervening Defendant.  
Prior History:  [***1] COA: 287505. Kent CC: 07-003903-CK.
Progressive Mich. Ins. Co. v. Harris, 488 Mich. 993, 791 N.W.2d 433, 2010 Mich. LEXIS 2495 (2010)
Progressive Mich. Ins. Co. v. Smith, 287 Mich. App. 537, 791 N.W.2d 480, 2010 Mich. App. LEXIS 493 (2010)  
Judges: Robert P. Young, Jr., Chief Justice. Michael F. Cavanagh, Marilyn Kelly, Stephen J. Markman, Diane M. Hathaway, Mary Beth Kelly, Brian K. Zahra, Justices. YOUNG, C.J. (concurring). MARKMAN, J. (concurring). MARILYN KELLY, J. (dissenting).  
Opinion




  [*977]   [**494]  Order
On order of the Court, leave to appeal having been granted and the briefs and oral arguments of the parties having been considered by the Court, we VACATE our order of December 17, 2010. The application for leave to appeal the March 16, 2010 judgment of the Court of Appeals is DENIED, because we are no longer persuaded that the question presented should be reviewed by this Court
Concur by: Robert P. Young, Jr.; Stephen J. Markman  
Concur




 [**495]  Young, C.J. (concurring).
 The judicial philosophical dilemma in statutory interpretation is . . . whether the "jurist interpreter" will be faithful to the actual statutory text and thus the intent of the lawgiver, or whether the jurist will be faithful to his or her own subjective policy desires.
-Robert P. Young, Jr., A Judicial Traditionalist Confront Justice Brennan's School of Judicial Philosophy.1 
The dissents of Judge Markey in the Court of Appeals and  [***2] Justice Marilyn Kelly in this Court illustrate the interpretive "dilemma" that I describe above when judges choose to ignore the statutory words.
I concur in this Court's order vacating our prior order in this case and denying leave to appeal. This is a simple case. MCL 500.3009(2) clearly and unambiguously requires that insurance companies place particular statutorily specified notice language in certain insurance policy documents when excluding a named driver pursuant to that provision.2  Progressive, the insurer, failed to comply [*978]  with this requirement and is thus required to pay the claim. I write to respond to the dissents in the Court of Appeals and this Court.
There is no ambiguity in the requirement that the Legislature's precise statutory disclaimer must be used in insurance policy documents in order to effectuate the exclusion of a bad driver. In this case, Progressive failed to include the required statutory disclaimer but paraphrased it, suggesting that its paraphrase was "close enough" to avoid paying the claim. The dissents here and in the Court of Appeals believe that "close enough" is as valid in law as it is in horseshoes.
However, the majority of the Court of Appeals correctly held that, because the notice language employed on the insured's certificate of insurance in this case deviated from that statutory language, Progressive did  [***4] not comply with the statutory notice requirement. Thus, the court was obligated to enforce the Legislature's directive that the named driver exclusion "shall not be valid."3  Progressive was required to pay the claim of the imperfectly excluded bad driver and appealed here from that decision.
The dissenting opinion of Judge Markey in the Court of Appeals, although professing an adherence to the philosophy of interpreting the law as plainly written, nevertheless ignored the statutory language:
[O]n rare occasion there may arise a situation where following this philosophy with myopic rigidity effects not only a  [**496]  complete thwarting of the Legislature's intent but also a profoundly unfair and inequitable result. . . . Must we as strict constructionists abandon "common sense" and render a decision not only remarkably hyper-technical legally but also profoundly unjust and jarring to what I will presume to say is the average person's sense of justice and fair play? I think not."4 
While my concurring colleague may argue that the result urged by the dissent is not so unreasonable, statements such as this represent a shocking departure  [***5] from the rule of law.5  All Michigan citizens should be [*979]  extraordinarily troubled by any judge who advances the notion that the rule of law must be enforced unless a judge finds an outcome in a particular case to be one of which he personally disapproves. In a constitutional republic, judges have no such authority, and the rule of law crumbles where a constitutional, validly enacted statutory mandate can be ignored simply because it offends a judge's sensibilities—even if on "rare occasion[s]."
With all due respect to Judge Markey, our judicial oaths require judges to enforce the Legislature's policy choices, even when we may personally find the outcome in a given case "unjust," "inequitable," "jarring," "hyper-technical," or contrary to what we intuit an "average person's" sensibilities to be.6  As this Court has stated, it is a mere "caricature" of judicial restraint for a judge "to assert that her common sense should be allowed to override the language of the statute."7 
As Judge Murray aptly noted in his concurring opinion in the Court of Appeals, our judicial duty is more than to "almost always" apply a statute's unambiguous words to the facts presented.8  The law must always guide the outcome, regardless of whether a judge perceives that outcome in a given case to be formalistic or "inequitable."
 [**497]  This Court has prided itself on its commitment to the rule of law, and in particular a return to fundamental constitutional principles regarding judicial interpretation of statutes.9  This has been true even where, as a [*980]  personal matter, a Justice may be discomforted by the ultimate result.10  But in a government characterized by the separation of powers, the people of  [***8] this state elect judges to enforce the law as the political branches of our government have given it to us.
The rule of law requires a judge to be subservient to the law itself, not the law to be subservient to the personal views of a judge.
Markman, J. (concurring).
Although I reach the same result as the Chief Justice, and, even had I not, I would have articulated my position much differently than do the dissents in this Court and  [***9] in the Court of Appeals, I nonetheless respectfully believe that the Chief Justice is overly severe in his criticism of these dissents.
The issue here is whether an insurance policy stating that an owner of an insured vehicle, under specified circumstances, remains "personally responsible" conforms with a statute requiring that all policies must communicate that an owner, under these circumstances, remains "personally liable." In my judgment, plaintiff-insurer's insurance policy did not satisfy the statute because an exact identity in language is required in the instant circumstances, in which an insurance statute has specified precise language for inclusion in such a policy. However, I also believe that this is a case in which a judge who adheres to the interpretative philosophy articulated by the Chief Justice, as do I, may quite reasonably disagree with his, and my, conclusion. In fairly giving meaning to the law, the obligation of the "textualist" or "interpretivist" is not to read the law "literally" or "narrowly," or to engage in "strict construction," but it is simply to read the law "reasonably." In light of this premise, I do not believe that either of the dissents has reached  [***10] an indefensible conclusion. A judge who views the difference between "liability" and "responsibility" as being of no reasonable consequence in the insurance policy at issue is not "ignoring words," engaging in a "shocking departure from the rule of law," or otherwise acting in disregard of his or her "oath of office." Nor do I believe, as suggested by the Chief Justice's citation to People v McIntire, that a judge who undertakes within the most narrow realm to consider the genuine "absurdity" of a result is acting in violation of his or her judicial powers. See Cameron v Auto Club Ins Ass'n, 476 Mich 55, 78-86; 718 N.W.2d 784 (2006) (Markman, J., concurring). While I respect the Chief Justice's convictions — and while I appreciate his apparently-approving [**498]  references to my own past jurisprudential statements, to which I continue to adhere — I also believe that there are many better cases in which to bring those convictions to bear.
Dissent by: MARILYN KELLY  
Dissent




Marilyn Kelly, J. (dissenting).
 [*981]  [C]anons [of interpretation] are not mandatory rules. They are guides that "need not be conclusive." They are designed to help judges determine the Legislature's intent as embodied in particular statutory language. And other circumstances  [***11] evidencing congressional intent can overcome their force. Chickasaw Nation v United States, 534 U.S. 84, 94; 122 S. Ct. 528; 151 L. Ed. 2d 474 (2001).
[citations omitted].
Because I agree with Judge Markey's Court of Appeals dissent, I dissent from the Court's decision to vacate our December 17, 2010 order granting leave to appeal and denying plaintiff's application for leave to appeal. I would reverse the Court of Appeals decision and reinstate the decision of the trial court.
Defendant Smith owned a vehicle but had no driver's license. Thus, he could not obtain no-fault insurance or license plates for the vehicle. He added defendant Harris to the title as a co-owner of the vehicle. Harris was able to obtain insurance from Progressive but signed a form listing Smith as an excluded driver under the policy, as permitted by MCL 500.3009(2).
Smith drove the vehicle and became involved in a collision with another vehicle owned by defendants Scott and Andrea Mihelsic. The Mihelsics filed a third-party negligence suit against Smith that he failed to defend, resulting in a default judgment against him. Progressive then brought this declaratory judgment and filed a motion for summary disposition arguing that it had no duty to indemnify  [***12] Smith because he was a named excluded driver under MCL 500.3009(2). The Mihelsics opposed the motion and filed their own motion for summary disposition, arguing that the exclusion was invalid. Progressive, they argued, had failed to use the exact language that appears in the statute. The trial court denied the Mihelsics' motion and granted Progressive's motion for summary disposition.
The Court of Appeals reversed the trial court in a 2-1 decision. It concluded that Progressive's failure to use the exact language that appears in MCL 500.3009(2) rendered the named-driver exclusion invalid.
The principal question on appeal is whether Progressive's use of the word "responsible" in place of "liable" on Harris's certificate of insurance, by itself, renders the named-driver exclusion invalid. The language of MCL 500.3009(2) provides:
If authorized by the insured, automobile liability or motor vehicle liability coverage may be excluded when a vehicle is operated by a named person. Such exclusion shall not be valid unless the following notice is on the face of the policy or the declaration page or certificate of the policy and on the certificate of insurance: Warning — when a named excluded person  [***13] operates a vehicle, all liability coverage is void — no one is insured. Owners of the vehicle and others legally responsible for the acts of the named excluded person remain fully personally liable.
 [*982]  Progressive used the warning language verbatim on Harris's insurance declaration. However, on her certificate of insurance, it replaced the word "liable" with the more plain-English "responsible."
To begin with, nothing signals that the Legislature intended that the warning language it used in the statute must be used verbatim in insurance policies. The statute [**499]  does not require it nor does it employ block quoting or quotation marks to show that its wording is the only way to communicate its message.
Moreover, this Court has "frequently observed that statutory interpretation is primarily an exercise in locating the intent of the Legislature. . . . While examination of statutory language is certainly a crucial element in that inquiry, . . . a dogged literalism should not be employed to defeat the Legislature's intent."11  The language Progressive used on the certificate of insurance satisfied the intent of the Legislature. The intent of MCL 500.3009(2) is to inform policy owners that their insurance  [***14] is ineffective for damages caused by an excluded driver and that they risk personal responsibility for those damages. Black's Law Dictionary defines "liable" as "responsible or answerable in law; legally obligated."12  "Responsibility" is defined as "liability."13  The insertion of the word "responsible" in place of "liable" did not materially change the meaning of the warning. Moreover, nothing in the record indicates that it misled or confused either Smith or Harris. To find the named-driver exclusion that was used here invalid is to elevate form over substance and defy common sense.
Chief Justice Young asserts in his concurring statement that Judge Markey's position is a "shocking departure from the rule of law." He is perhaps too readily shocked. Her statement and mine are not departures at all. Our reading is faithful to the statutory language and effects exactly what the Legislature intended when it enacted this law: an exempted driver should not receive insurance benefits. The result of the majority's decision is to enforce the law in a manner  [***15] that violates the Legislature's intent.14  My personal views play no part in my interpretation. I interpret the statutory language to conform with the obvious reason it was written.15 
 [*983]  In this case, Smith knew he could not obtain insurance, so he got Harris to buy it. He then drove his truck illegally with no license and no insurance. It is quite a departure from the statute's intent to require Progressive to indemnify Smith  [**500]  when he knowingly violated the law and knew himself to be excluded from the insurance policy. The Court requires Progressive to provide insurance coverage for a party it never had a contract with and never agreed to insure.
Moreover, although the Mihelsics are correct that the insurance commissioner's bulletin 79-11 addresses the named-driver exclusion and quotes the § 500.3009(2) language, bulletin 81-4 also deals with the excluded-driver  [***17] exception. It addresses certificates of insurance, shows examples of what the forms should look like and states what language should be on the forms. In bulletin 81-4, the commissioner writes that the wording on the certificate "shall appear as follows." It then uses the word "responsible" in place of "liable."16  Although the bulletins do not supplant the statute, there is unrefuted evidence that the industry relies on the commissioner for guidance. Thus, I do not think it unreasonable for Progressive to have relied on Bulletin 81-4 for direction in wording its insurance certificates.
The named-driver exclusion in this case should be found valid and enforceable. Its deviation in wording from MCL 500.3009(2) is not material. Smith was not confused by it. It would seem an unreasonably harsh and unjust result to allow Smith to profit from his wrongful actions.
Therefore, I dissent and would reverse the Court of Appeals and reinstate the decision of the trial court.

 

End of Document
