
  PositiveAs of: September 19, 2020 9:19 PM Z
Stand Up For Democracy v. Sec'y of State
Supreme Court of Michigan
August 3, 2012, Filed
No. 145387

Reporter
492 Mich. 588 *; 822 N.W.2d 159 **; 2012 Mich. LEXIS 1243 ***
 STAND UP FOR DEMOCRACY, Plaintiff-Appellee, v SECRETARY OF STATE and BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS, Defendants, and CITIZENS FOR FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY, Intervenor-Defendant-Appellant.  
Prior History: Stand Up for Democracy v. Sec'y of State, 2012 Mich. App. LEXIS 1085 (Mich. Ct. App., June 8, 2012)  
Counsel: For Stand Up for Democracy, Plaintiff: Herbert A Sanders, Detroit, MI; Melvin J Hollowell Jr, Detroit, MI; John C Philo, Detroit, MI; William H Goodman, Detroit, MI. 
For Secretary of State, Defendant:Denise C Barton, Detroit, MI.    
Judges:  [***1] Chief Justice: Robert P. Young, Jr. Justices: Michael F. Cavanagh, Marilyn Kelly, Stephen J. Markman, Diane M. Hathaway, Mary Beth Kelly, Brian K. Zahra. YOUNG, C.J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part). CAVANAGH, MARILYN KELLY, and HATHAWAY, JJ. (concurring in part and dissenting in part). MARKMAN, J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).  
Opinion by: Mary Beth Kelly  
Opinion




 [**160]   [*593]  Mary Beth Kelly, J.
This case requires that we determine whether to grant a writ of mandamus in favor of plaintiff, Stand Up For Democracy, to compel the Board of State Canvassers to certify plaintiff's referendum petition for inclusion on the November 2012 ballot. Intervening defendant, Citizens for Fiscal Responsibility, challenged the certification of plaintiff's referendum petition, alleging that it failed to comply [*594]  with the type-size requirement of MCL 168.482(2) and that the doctrine of substantial compliance, whereby technical deficiencies are resolved in favor of certification, did not apply. The Court of Appeals agreed with both assertions, but concluded it was required to follow its decision in Bloomfield Charter Township v Oakland County Clerk1  and conclude that the petition substantially complied with the type-size  [***2] requirement of MCL 168.482(2) and that certification was required. Consequently, the  [**161]  Court of Appeals directed the board to certify the petition.2 
However, because MCL 168.482(2) uses the mandatory term "shall" and does not, by its plain terms, permit certification of deficient petitions with regard to form or content, a majority of this Court holds that the doctrine of substantial compliance is inapplicable to referendum petitions submitted for certification. Therefore, we reverse the Court of Appeals' judgment in this regard and we overrule Bloomfield Charter Twp.
Three justices of this Court further conclude that the type-size requirement of MCL 168.482(2) requires that the "type," not the "letters," of the petition heading measure 14 points. Because the Court of Appeals held that  [***3] plaintiff failed to actually comply with the type-size requirement of MCL 168.482(2) given that the letters did not measure 14 points, we would also have reversed that portion of the Court of Appeals' judgment.
 [*595]  Because a majority of this Court holds that a new writ of mandamus should enter directing the Board of State Canvassers to certify plaintiff's petition as sufficient, a majority of this Court directs the Board of State Canvassers to certify plaintiff's petition for the ballot. Pursuant to MCR 7.317(C)(3), we direct the Clerk of the Court to issue the judgment order forthwith.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On February 29, 2012, plaintiff filed its referendum petition to invoke a referendum with regard to 2011 PA 4, MCL 141.1501 et seq., the emergency financial manager law, and to request certification of the petition from the Board of State Canvassers.3  The petition  [*596]  contained 203,238 valid signatures, well exceeding the number necessary to certify the petition and to place the referendum on the November 2012 ballot. On March 14, 2012, plaintiff submitted its printer's affidavit attesting that the petition heading was "PRINTED IN CAPITAL LETTERS IN 14-POINT BOLDFACE TYPE[.]"
 [**162]  On April 9, 2012, intervenor filed a challenge to the form of plaintiff's referendum petition, asserting, in part, that the heading, "REFERENDUM OF LEGISLATION PROPOSED BY INITIATIVE PETITION," did not comply with the requirement of MCL 168.482(2) that the heading be "printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type . . . ."
The Board of State Canvassers considered intervenor's challenge on April 26, 2012. At the hearing, intervenor asserted that the form and content requirements of MCL 168.482(2) are mandatory. Intervenor submitted two affidavits of two printers who reviewed the petition and stated that the petition was deficient because its heading did not measure 14-point type. Plaintiff countered that the board should apply the doctrine of substantial compliance and approve the petition and, alternatively, that its petition actually complied with the type-size  [***6] requirement of the statute. Plaintiff relied on its printer's affidavit, as well as the expert testimony of two printers, in support of its argument. Plaintiff also criticized one of intervenor's expert's affidavits for simply measuring one of the capital letters in the heading.
At the close of the hearing, two members of the board voted in favor of a motion to certify the petition, reasoning that "there was more than substantial compliance, . . . there was total compliance." The remaining two board members voted to deny the motion, believing [*597]  there to be a "legitimate question as to the size of the words" and reasoning that substantial compliance is insufficient under MCL 168.482(2) given its mandatory language. Consequently, the board did not approve the motion to certify the petition.
Plaintiff then filed a complaint for mandamus in the Court of Appeals, requesting the Court to order defendants, the Board of State Canvassers and the Secretary of State, to certify the petition for inclusion on the November 2012 ballot because the board had a clear legal duty to certify the petition, because plaintiff either substantially or actually complied with the 14-point-type statutory requirement.  [***7] The Court of Appeals first ruled that "the Calibri font utilized in plaintiff's petition heading is smaller than the prescribed 14-point type measurement of 14/72 inches."4  Without defining the term "type," the panel reasoned that "text that does not measure 14 point, or 14/72 inches, is insufficient under the statute."5  The Court of Appeals, however, concluded that it was bound to follow Bloomfield Charter Twp and concluded that plaintiff's petition had substantially complied with MCL 168.482(2).6  The Court therefore granted plaintiff's complaint for a writ of mandamus, compelling inclusion of the referendum on the ballot.
We granted oral argument on the application for leave to appeal to consider "(1) whether plaintiff actually complied with the 14-point type requirement in MCL 168.482(2), specifically given the terms 'point' and 'type;' and (2) if not, whether substantial compliance with the 14-point type requirement in § 482(2) is sufficient to give plaintiff a clear legal right to certification [*598]  of the petition."7  In lieu of granting leave to appeal, pursuant to MCR 7.302(H)(1)  [***8] a majority of this Court concludes that the Court of Appeals' judgment is reversed, that substantial  [**163]  compliance is insufficient to certify plaintiff's petitions, and we issue a writ of mandamus, directing the Board of State Canvassers to certify plaintiff's petition as sufficient.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review for an abuse of discretion a court's decision to issue or deny a writ of mandamus.8  This dispute also involves a question of statutory interpretation, which we review de novo.9  "[O]ur primary task in construing a statute, is to discern and give effect to the intent of the Legislature."10  The words of the statute are the most reliable evidence of the Legislature's intent and we must give each word its plain and ordinary meaning.11  "In interpreting the statute at issue, we consider both the plain meaning of the critical word or phrase as well as 'its placement and purpose in the statutory scheme.'"12 
III. ANALYSIS
This appeal concerns a big constitutional issue, even though its focus is something as small as 14/72 of an inch.  [*599]  This matter turns on what many citizens may regard as a trivial issue: Whether a heading on a petition signed by over 200,000 people satisfies the statutory requirement that the petition heading be in "14-point boldfaced type[.]"13  As technical as this appears, the rule of law is implicated here because this issue concerns the constitutional foundation of how we govern ourselves.
Although we colloquially call ourselves a "democracy," we are not. We are a constitutional republic in which we, as Michigan citizens, elect our representatives to local and state legislative bodies to enact our laws. This republican form of government is guaranteed to us in the United States Constitution.14 
In Michigan, we have enacted into our State Constitution an exception: The right of the people by initiative or referendum  [***10] directly to enact laws or to repeal those validly enacted by our Legislature.15  Thus, as plaintiff seeks here, it is possible for a small minority of citizens to suspend a validly enacted law and require that that law be voted on in a general election. This case well demonstrates that tension between constitutional interests: the right to a republican form of government versus a constitutional process that allows a small minority to suspend the enactments of that government.
In the very constitutional provision creating this right of petition by initiative and referendum, the Legislature is required to prescribe the rules by which  [*600]  such petitions may validly be made.16  It has done so, and one such provision is the mandatory  [**164]  14-point-boldfaced-type requirement that is challenged here.17  No doubt in most ordinary circumstances whether a heading is in 14-point or 12-point type would be an inconsequential issue. But, because the power of referendum affects duly enacted laws, these so-called "trivial" requirements protect the citizens of Michigan from having their laws suspended by small factions—unless  [***11] the petitioners satisfy all the requirements for invoking a referendum.18  With these principles in mind, we turn to the statutory requirement that the petition heading "shall be . . . printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type[.]"19 
A. SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE
Plaintiff first suggests that the statutory scheme allows for certification of a referendum petition if that petition substantially complies with MCL 168.482.20   [*601]  The applicable statutory provision, MCL 168.482(2) provides:
If the measure to be submitted proposes a constitutional amendment, initiation of legislation, or referendum of legislation, the heading of each part of the petition shall be prepared in the following form and printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type:
* * *

REFERENDUM OF LEGISLATION

PROPOSED BY INITIATIVE PETITION21 
The Legislature's use of the term "shall" "'indicates a mandatory and imperative directive.'"22  Nowhere does the language of this provision indicate that compliance  [***12] with the 14-point-type requirement may be achieved despite deficiencies. Indeed, other provisions of the Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq., demonstrate that the Legislature knows how to construct language specifically permitting substantial compliance with regard to form and content requirements.23  Similar  [**165]  language  [*602]  is conspicuously absent from MCL 168.482(2) and demonstrates a clear intent that petitions for referendums, voter initiatives, and constitutional amendments strictly comply with the form and content requirements of the statute. This conclusion is further supported by the Legislature's 1965 amendment of MCL 168.482, which omitted language that specifically permitted substantial compliance but retained the mandatory requirement that the petition heading be in 14-point type.24  Indeed, the use of the mandatory term "shall" in MCL 168.482(2), in the absence of any language indicating that substantial compliance with the statute's requirements suffices, indicates a clear intent that such a petition must strictly comply with the type requirement. Consequently, substantial compliance with MCL 168.482(2) is not permitted. To certify a petition that does not strictly comply  [***13] with the requirements of MCL 168.482 on the basis that it substantially complied with the statutory requirements would defeat the Legislature's intent. However, "our judicial role precludes [us from] imposing different policy choices than those selected by the Legislature"; rather, we must apply the terms as written.25 
Plaintiff, however, also relies on MCL 168.544d, which provides that petitions circulated countywide "shall be substantially as provided in [MCL 168.482] . . .." Plaintiff asserts that this provision adopts the substantial compliance  [*603]  doctrine and permits certification of nonconforming referendum petitions. Because plaintiff circulated its petition countywide, MCL 168.544d is applicable. That provision provides:
Nominating petitions for the offices under this act and petitions for a constitutional amendment, initiation of legislation, or referendum of legislation or a local proposal may be circulated on a countywide form. Petitions circulated countywide shall be on a form prescribed by the secretary of state, which form shall be substantially as provided in sections 482, 544a, or 544c, whichever is applicable. The secretary of state may provide for a petition  [***16] form larger than 8—1/2 inches by 13 inches and shall provide for identification of the city or township in which the person signing the petition is registered. The certificate of the circulator may be on the reverse side of the petition. This section does not prohibit the circulation of petitions on another form prescribed by this act.
By its plain language, this provision permits the Secretary of State to prescribe a form that itself "substantially" complies with the requirements of MCL 168.482. Thus, to the extent that MCL 168.544d permits substantial compliance, it only permits the Secretary of State to prescribe petition requirements that are in substantial compliance with MCL 168.482, MCL 168.544a, or MCL 168.544c of the Michigan Election Law. Contrary to plaintiff's contention, the statute does not allow a petitioner itself to determine what substantially complies with the applicable election law requirements. The Legislature only provided  [**166]  the Secretary of State with that discretion.
More significantly, the Secretary of State's prescribed form, as permitted by MCL 168.544d, mandates strict compliance with the Legislature's mandate in MCL 168.482(2) that the heading of a referendum  [***17] petition be  [*604]  printed in 14-point type.26  Accordingly, MCL 168.544d does not constitute a broad substantial compliance provision, as plaintiff would have us interpret it. Because the Secretary of State's prescribed form mandates strict compliance with MCL 168.482(2), plaintiff's reliance on MCL 168.544d is unavailing.
In the absence of statutory language supporting the substantial compliance doctrine, plaintiff nevertheless posits that Michigan caselaw provides a general substantial compliance exception to the mandatory requirements of the Michigan Election Law. Plaintiff principally relies on Bloomfield Charter Twp for the proposition that Michigan courts have allowed issues to be placed on the ballot despite the existence  [***18] of technical deficiencies in form and content. Although a lineage of Michigan Court of Appeals cases exists applying the substantial compliance doctrine before an election, we are unwilling to follow this line of cases and adopt a general substantial compliance exception because such a rule is inconsistent with the statutory scheme as well as our jurisprudence.27 
 [*605]  In Bloomfield Charter Twp,28  a group of developers filed annexation petitions with the county clerk, who certified the petitions and scheduled a referendum election regarding annexation. The township sought to enjoin the election and also alleged, in part, that the annexation petitions failed to comply with MCL 168.488, which requires that annexation petitions meet the requirements of MCL 168.482(1) and (4) through (6). The circuit court denied the township's request for injunctive relief and concluded that certification of the petitions was proper because "'any technical deficiencies in the petitions are not material . . . .'"29  Approximately a year later, after voters had approved the annexation, the Court of Appeals affirmed the circuit court's ruling. The Court acknowledged that the annexation petitions were technically deficient under the statute, and reasoned  [**167]  that it would apply "the doctrine [of substantial compliance] in this case involving imperfect petitions, absent  [***20] the Legislature's instruction that a petitioned-for election will be precluded unless the initiating petitions exactly match the Michigan Election Law requirements for form and content."30  The Court, therefore, affirmed the circuit court and concluded that it had properly found substantial compliance and had correctly refused to permit the minor defects to preclude the election.31 
 [*606]  Bloomfield Charter Twp is overruled to the extent that it stands for the proposition that substantial compliance with mandatory petition requirements compels the pre-election certification of a technically deficient petition. Clearly, Bloomfield Charter Twp's reasoning is contrary to the plain language of MCL 168.482(2), which we have explained contains a mandatory 14-point-type requirement. A nonconforming referendum petition cannot be certified for inclusion on the ballot because that result is contrary to the Legislature's intent that petitions strictly conform to the requirements of MCL 168.482. Simply because the Legislature has not included an explicit instruction that "a technically imperfect petition necessarily precludes  [***21] an election regarding the matter therein addressed," does not mean that the Legislature intended inclusion of deficient petitions as Bloomfield Charter Twp reasoned.32  Bloomfield Charter Twp inferred too much from the legislative silence and effectively ignored the mandatory language that the Legislature chose to use when stating the form and content requirements of MCL 168.482.
Moreover, while this Court has recognized application of the substantial compliance doctrine to mandatory petition requirements post-election,33  it has not recently sanctioned application of substantial compliance  [*607]  to nonconforming petitions before an election. The only Michigan Supreme Court case to apply the substantial compliance doctrine pre-election is Kadans v Wayne County Clerk.34  In that case, the plaintiff sought a writ of mandamus compelling the defendant to certify his nonconforming nominating petitions. Fifty-eight of the plaintiff's fifty-nine petitions were not 8 1/2 by 13 inches as required by former MCL 168.544, but were 2 1/2 to 3 inches shorter than 13 inches because they were missing the circulator's affidavit. This Court unanimously found that former MCL 168.544 had "been complied  [***22] with by plaintiff according to the rule of 'substantial compliance'" and that the plaintiff was entitled to the writ of mandamus.35 
Kadans's broad application of the substantial compliance standard, however, was repudiated by the Legislature's subsequent  [**168]  adoption of MCL 168.544d.36  Before adoption of that provision, the law was silent with respect to agency-created or agency-prescribed petitions. The adoption of MCL 168.544d now provides  [***23] clear guidance concerning when substantial compliance is allowed with regard to agency-created or agency-prescribed petitions and essentially delegates to the Secretary of State the ability (through its prescribed petitions) to determine what requirements must be fully complied with and what requirements need be only substantially complied with. Consequently, the only case from this Court applying a general substantial compliance exception to mandatory petition requirements of the Michigan Election Law has been superseded by statute.
 [*608]  In sum, neither the statutory scheme nor the caselaw plaintiff relies on supports application of the substantial compliance doctrine in the period before an election. Rather, for substantial compliance to be sufficient before an election, its use must be rooted in a particular statutory exception to the statutory formatting and content requirements. Because no statutory provision permitting application of substantial compliance exists in the instant case, and because intervenor has raised a pre-election challenge, plaintiff must have actually complied with the requirements of MCL 168.482(2) in  [***24] order for its referendum petition to be certified.37 
B. ACTUAL COMPLIANCE 
1. TYPE-SIZE REQUIREMENT OF MCL 168.482(2)
To determine whether plaintiff has actually complied with MCL 168.482(2), we must first determine the meaning of the phrase "printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type[.]" The Michigan Election Law does not define the terms "point" and "type," but the parties agree that the traditional definitions of "point"  [***25] and "type" have not substantially changed since the enactment of the statute in 1954. We agree with the traditional definitions proposed because they are consistent  [*609]  with those terms' acquired technical meanings38  and those definitions have remained constant up to the present day. "Point" is defined as "a unit that is used to measure the size of type used in printing and that is equivalent to about 1/72 inch[.]"39  "Type" is  [**169]  defined as "[a] rectangular block, usually of metal or wood, having its face so shaped as to produce, in printing, a letter, figure, or other character[.]"40  Multiple dictionary depictions of type show that the character, or typeface, does not cover the entire surface of the type, but rather  [*610]  includes spacing above or below the letters, to prevent the printed characters from touching.41  These depictions further demonstrate that the point size of type measures the entire vertical face of the metal block. The significance of these definitions is that the character printed is smaller than the point size of the type.42 
The parties' views diverge, however, with respect to whether the phrase "printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type" requires measurement of the "letters" or of the "type." Intervenor, like the Court of Appeals, interprets the phrase to require that the "letters" measure 14 points. We disagree with this interpretation and conclude that the type must measure 14 points, not the resulting printed letters. This is because the technical definition of "point" specifically denotes that point measures type size, which is the entire vertical length of the  [***29] printer's block. As explained, the technical meanings of "point" and "type" necessarily incorporate some amount of blank space so that the capital letters in 14-point type do not necessarily measure 14/72 of an inch.
 [*611]  Intervenor claims that because "in" means "made of," the letters must measure 14 points. However, this argument is specious. The term "14-point" specifically modifies the word "type," and there is no indication that the Legislature intended to diverge from the technical meanings of the terms "point" and "type." Had the Legislature intended that the physical height of the letters measure 14 points, it would not have used the term "type" as modified by "14-point" and instead could have specified  [**170]  that the letters must "measure 14 points."43 
Furthermore, intervenor's argument does not  [***30] take into account the remaining subsections within MCL 168.482, which provide additional support for our conclusion. Subsection (3) states, "The full text of the amendment so proposed shall follow and be printed in 8-point type," while subsection (5) states, "The following warning shall be printed in 12-point type . . . ." Reading these subsections together with subsection (2), and consistently as a whole as we must,44  it is clear that  [*612]  the point size of all the required text refers to the size of the type and not the individual letters. The fact that the other content requirements are not required to be in capital letters, but a combination of uppercase and lowercase letters, necessarily contemplates that letters in the required type size may have different heights, since a lowercase "x" has a different height than an uppercase "E." This provides further support for the conclusion that the "type," and not each individual "letter," must be measured. Otherwise, if intervenor's position were adopted, each of the letters in subsections (3) and (5) would have to be of equal physical size, contrary to the Legislature's clear indication in subsections (3) and (5) that the required text appear  [***31] in both uppercase and lowercase letters. Given the foregoing, it is clear that the reference to "letters" in MCL 168.482(2) is intended merely to clarify that the text of the heading appear in all capital letters.45  We would therefore hold that MCL 168.482(2), by its plain terms, requires that the type of the petition heading measure 14 points, not the individual letters.
2. MEASUREMENT OF DIGITAL TYPE
Having concluded that the "type" of the petition heading and not the letters must measure 14-points, does not end the analysis. Rather, it must be determined  [*613]  whether plaintiff's petition heading measures 14-point type. This question necessarily involves the preliminary issues  [**171]  whether the traditional meanings of "point" and "type" are transferrable to digital text and, if so, how digital 14-point  [***33] type is to be measured.
While plaintiff and intervenor disagree on these points, the assistant attorneys general representing the Board of State Canvassers and the Secretary of State conceded at oral argument and in their supplemental brief concerning intervenor's application for leave to appeal in this Court, that those "same [traditional] concepts [of point and type] are replicated in computer software programs that result in the production of digital type from an electronic printer."46  Counsel for the board and the Secretary of State has also conceded that the same methods of measurement applicable to metal blocks of type are applicable to digital type.47   [*614]  Further, because this Court can take judicial notice of facts not subject to reasonable dispute,48  I acknowledge that Microsoft's glossary of typographical terms defines "point" consistently with that term's traditional meaning, as "[a] unit of measurement, often used to measure type size, equal to 0.013837 inch (approximately equal to 1/72 . . .)."49  And although Microsoft's glossary does not include the definition of "type," it defines "font size" as the "size of type . . . ."50  A separate Microsoft  [**172]   [*615]  webpage further indicates that,  [***34] when measuring the point size of type, the letter does not cover the entire "block" because "a little bit [is] added on . . . so that lines of type 'set solid' (without any additional space between them) do not bash into each other."51 
Given the concessions made by counsel for the board and the Secretary of State and Microsoft's definitions of point and type, it  [***38] is clear that digital type is the equivalent of physical type and that computer software continues to use this basic terminology.52  Further, because digital type and physical type are functional equivalents, they are measured in the same manner except in the instance of digital type; in that instance an invisible box, which replicates the printer's block, is measured and is reflected by the font size selected.53 
  [*616]  3. APPLICATION
In the present case, plaintiff used 14-point Calibri font for its petition heading, as attested to by plaintiff's printer. Although plaintiff's printer's affidavit did not state the basis for this conclusion,  [***39] the affiant explained at the Board of State Canvassers hearing how he verified the point size:
When I was asked to sign the affidavit, I took the file that we were given, that we had assembled for printing purposes, and I used a program . . . called PDF Suite. And I went in and I verified that it was 14-point . . . .
Intervenor filed two competing affidavits, but did not present any expert testimony at the hearing. Both affiants measured the size of the petition heading's capital letters and each concluded that the heading is in "a significantly smaller font than required" without providing a basis for this conclusion. I do not view these affidavits as dispositive because, as I have already concluded, measuring the letters to determine compliance with MCL 168.482(2) is an inappropriate method of measurement.
 [**173]  I also do not view as dispositive the intervenor's supplemental affidavit submitted after we granted oral argument on the application.54  In this affidavit, the affiant attested that, using an E-scale ruler,55  the type of  [*617]  the petition heading did not measure 14 points, and that while the E-scale ruler "subtract[s] the space above or below the actual letter," the E-scale ruler only  [***40] reflects how characters of a particular font in 14-point type will appear. Because different fonts take up different amounts of space within the digital block, an E-scale ruler cannot definitively measure whether the actual font selected is in 14-point type.
I also find the affiant's comparison of plaintiff's heading with 14-point type metal blocks that were available in 1954 to be unpersuasive. The affiant avers that this comparison shows that plaintiff's heading is "clearly a smaller type size," yet the spacing between the lines of text in each of the three examples appears to be the same. This exercise only demonstrates what we already know: Different styles of font will take up different amounts of space on a printer's metal or digital block. In fact, plaintiff's expert  [***41] testified with regard to this very fact at the hearing:
Basically when you're talking about 14-point type, you're talking about an area that's just less than a fifth of an inch, .194. And it becomes a canvas that a type designer gets to work with, and sometimes they use the whole canvas and sometimes they use part of the canvas.
Consequently, the affiant's comparison does not establish that plaintiff's heading is noncompliant. Rather, because the spacing between the lines of each example of text appears to be equal, the comparison tends to demonstrate actual compliance with the 14-point-type requirement.
My review of intervenor's evidence shows that intervenor failed to establish that plaintiff's petition's heading was not in 14-point type and otherwise failed to create a legitimate question of fact regarding the type size used. Plaintiff's evidence established that its  [*618]  printer used a 14-point Calibri font, which the printer verified using Adobe software, and which intervenor simply failed to rebut. Because Microsoft defines font size to equal type size, plaintiff presented evidence establishing that it actually complied with the type-size requirement of MCL 168.482(2). There being no  [***42] evidence to the contrary, I conclude that plaintiff actually complied with MCL 168.482(2).
C. MANDAMUS
We must next determine whether plaintiff is entitled to a writ of mandamus requiring certification of the referendum petition. Mandamus is an extraordinary remedy and the primary purpose of a writ of mandamus is to enforce duties required by law.56  To obtain a writ of mandamus the plaintiff must show that it has a clear legal right to the performance of the specific duty sought to be  [**174]  compelled and that the defendant has a clear legal duty to perform the act.57 
The board's duty with respect to referendum petitions is limited to determining the sufficiency of a petition's form and content and whether there are sufficient signatures to warrant certification.58  In this case, there is no question that plaintiff collected more than enough valid signatures in support of its petition. However, because the board deadlocked on the issue of compliance with the type-size requirement of MCL 168.482(2), the board did not certify the petition.  [***43] Because plaintiff's petition actually complied with the type-size requirements of MCL 168.482(2), the board is  [*619]  obligated to certify the petition. Accordingly, I conclude that plaintiff is entitled to a writ of mandamus because the board has a clear legal duty to certify the petition as actually compliant with MCL 168.482(2).
IV. CONCLUSION
A majority of this Court holds that the doctrine of substantial compliance is inapplicable to referendum petitions submitted for pre-election certification and we overrule Bloomfield Twp. I and two other justices further conclude that the type-size requirement of MCL 168.482(2) requires that the "type," not the "letters," of the petition heading measure 14 points. I additionally conclude that plaintiff actually complied with the type-size requirement. Finally, a majority of this Court holds that plaintiff is entitled to a new writ of mandamus requiring the Board of State Canvassers to certify its petition as sufficient. Accordingly, a majority of this Court directs the Board of State Canvassers to certify plaintiff's petition for the ballot and, pursuant to MCR 7.317(C)(3), we direct the Clerk of the Court to issue  [***44] the judgment order forthwith.
 SUMMARY
(1) A majority of this Court holds that the Court of Appeals erred by granting mandamus on the basis of plaintiff's substantial compliance with election law. The Court of Appeals opinion and grant of mandamus are reversed. Substantial compliance with the requirements of MCL 168.482(2) is insufficient to establish that plaintiff's referendum petition is entitled to be placed on the ballot. Entitlement to be placed on the ballot requires a showing of actual compliance with the law.
 [*620]  (2) The Board of State Canvassers shall certify the petition as sufficient because a majority of the Court concludes that plaintiff either actually complied with the law or that the Court of Appeals' original writ of mandamus was not erroneous. Accordingly, a new writ of mandamus shall enter.
Mary Beth Kelly
Concur by: Robert P. Young, Jr. (In Part); Michael F. Cavanagh (In Part); MARILYN KELLY (In Part); Diane M. Hathaway (In Part); Stephen J. Markman (In Part)  
Dissent by: Robert P. Young, Jr. (In Part); Michael F. Cavanagh (In Part); MARILYN KELLY (In Part); Diane M. Hathaway (In Part); Stephen J. Markman (In Part)  
Dissent




Young, C.J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
We concur with and join parts  [***45] I, II, III(A), and III(B)(1) of Justice Mary Beth Kelly's opinion. We agree with Justices Mary Beth Kelly and Markman that actual compliance with the statutory type requirements is mandated. In determining how to measure the type size, we believe that the technical (namely, the customary printer's) understanding of the statutory terms "type" and "point" negate the intervernor's notion that one can determine the size of "type" by measuring the characters actually printed. Consequently, the question we must resolve is whether the "size 14" Calibri font generated by plaintiff's computer is a faithful replication of the  [**175]  statutorily required heading in 14-point type that would have been generated by using traditional movable type.
On this question, Justice Mary Beth Kelly believes that it is possible on this record, and with reference to extra record materials, both to determine how a digitized computer font is produced and that the font at issue here meets the statutory size requirement. She does so by invoking judicial notice. We do not share Justice Mary Beth KELLY's technical literacy: we lack the necessary knowledge of printing and, more important, the programming necessary to create  [***46] computer fonts. Therefore, we respectfully dissent from her conclusion that plaintiff actually complied with the type size requirements in MCL 168.482(2).
 [*621]  As a result, we conclude that plaintiff failed to establish that its petition heading met the statutory type and print requirements. Because of this failure of proofs, we would deny plaintiff's claim for mandamus, thus reversing the Court of Appeals' decision on the merits. However, given the stunning transformation of the printing industry since the statutory requirements were enacted—from movable type to computer generated print—and because we believe that the historical statutory terms are nonetheless applicable in this new computer era, it is important for this Court to establish a precedent to guide future petition efforts. While we reject her conclusion that actual compliance has been proved here, we believe that Justice Mary Beth KELLY's opinion has provided this guidance on the controlling legal principles.
Important to our resolution of this case, however, is the fact that the legal standards under which the Secretary of State, the Board of State Canvassers, and the parties operated were confused and, as held today, erroneous.  [***47] As a consequence, we would allow plaintiff an opportunity to present proofs to the Board of State Canvassers under the announced correct legal standards. Accordingly, we would remand this case to the Board of State Canvassers for further proceedings to determine whether plaintiff's petition heading actually complied with the type size requirements of MCL 168.482(2).
As eloquently stated by Justice Mary Beth Kelly, this appeal concerns a big constitutional issue about an apparently small thing: the size of a heading required for circulated petitions like the one at issue here. And although a "technical" requirement—the size of a petition heading—is involved, this is a legally and constitutionally significant matter because compliance with the  [*622]  legal petition requirements is the only means by which a small fraction of Michigan citizens is permitted to countermand the will of the people as expressed through the legislation duly enacted by their elected representatives.
So this case about a "technicality" is not about the wisdom of the act the plaintiff's petition seeks to suspend, nor is it about "the people's right to vote," as plaintiff characterizes the issue. The fact is, the people have  [***48] voted: they elected the very Legislature and Governor who enacted the emergency financial manager act, PA 4, MCL 141.1501 et seq., that plaintiff challenges with its petition.
The sole question before us is whether plaintiff has filed a qualifying, legally compliant petition that permits it to both suspend this validly enacted law and require its members' fellow citizens to determine whether this law will remain on the books. As Justice Mary Beth Kelly explains, this is a core issue in a constitutional republic like ours.
  [**176]  I. ANALYSIS 
A. THE JUDGE-MADE "SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE" DOCTRINE, TO THE EXTENT THAT IT REMAINS VIABLE, IS SUPERSEDED HERE BY THE LEGISLATIVELY DEFINED SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE PROVISION OF MCL 168.544d.
MCL 168.482(2) requires that the petition heading "shall be . . . printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type[.]" A majority of the Court agrees that, for the reasons that Justice Mary Beth Kelly's and Justice Markman's separate opinions explain, the judge-made doctrine of substantial compliance is insufficient to entitle plaintiff to certification of its petition. Because MCL 168.482(2) uses the mandatory language "shall" regarding the type size of the petition  [***49] heading, plaintiff  [*623]  must fully adhere to this provision unless another statutory provision specifically allows for substantial compliance. As Justices Mary Beth Kelly and Markman correctly explain, there is no statutory provision that would allow the Board of State Canvassers to apply the doctrine of substantial compliance to plaintiff's petition in this case. In particular, MCL 168.544d incorporates a substantial compliance provision specifying that only the Secretary of State may prescribe forms that substantially comply with the statutory requirements for petitions.
In this case, the Secretary of State actually mandated compliance with the required statutory conditions,1  and plaintiff cannot prevail on the ground that it "substantially complied" with the 14-point type requirement. Thus, unless plaintiff actually complied, there is no clear legal right to have its petition certified.
B. THE MANDATORY STATUTORY "POINT" SIZE REQUIREMENTS FOR "TYPE" REFER TO THE SIZE OF A TRADITIONAL MOVABLE TYPE BLOCK, NOT THE SIZE OF THE ACTUAL PRINTED CHARACTER ON THE PETITION.
We agree with Justice Mary Beth Kelly that the Court of Appeals panel erred to the extent that it concluded that the petition heading's printed letters themselves must measure 14 points in height. While the Court of Appeals panel correctly recognized that a point is a unit of measurement (approximating 1/72 of an  [*624]  inch), the definitions of "point" and "type" that predominated at the time the Legislature enacted MCL 168.482 belie the conclusion that the printed letters themselves must measure 14 points in height.
The Legislature enacted MCL 168.482 in 1954 and amended it in 1965 to provide that the heading "shall be . . . printed in capital letters in 14-point bold  [***51] face type[.]"2  In determining the meanings of "point" and "type," this Court must accord  [**177]  these terms their "peculiar and appropriate meaning[s]" at the time of enactment.3 
Webster's New International Dictionary of the English Language, Second Edition Unabridged (1948) defines "type" as "[a] rectangular block, usually of metal or wood, having its face so shaped as to produce, in printing, a letter, figure, or other character" or, alternatively, as "[s]uch blocks, or the letters or characters impressed, collectively."4  It defines "point system" specifically in relation to the blocks themselves: "A system according to which the various sizes of type bodies, leads, etc., bear a fixed and simple relation to one another. . . . The value of the point is .013837 inch, or nearly 1/72 inch."5 
 [*625]  Importantly, the dictionary contains a diagram of type that shows that the type face, or raised portion of the type block that actually imprints the ink onto the paper, is somewhat smaller than the size of the type block itself. The following diagram of a type block, taken from a 1963 treatise on typography, similarly shows how the type face does not extend to the entire space of the printer's block. Moreover, it shows that the point body of the type is measured by reference to the entire printer's block.6 

This is consistent with the print literature dating back to the turn of the last century. An early twentieth century technical treatise on type explains:
 [**178]  Only a few letters, like J and Q, cover nearly the entire surface on the end of the type; other letters, like B h l i,  [*626]  cover the upper portion chiefly and leave a blank space at the bottom; while the small letters, like a e o u v, occupy only the middle portion of the surface; still others, like g y p, cover the middle and lower portions of the surface. As all these irregular shapes must be made to appear in line with each other, the type-body on which they are made is larger than the letter.7 
Moreover, Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language (Unabridged) defines "point" by referring to an illustration of "type" that refers to the block's "point size" as the entire length of the block, not just the raised portion that creates the printed character.
In short, there does not appear to be any dispute about the historical understanding of these technical printer's terms.8  These dictionary definitions and technical  [*627]  sources show  [***54] unequivocally that, "although the body size of metal type is consistent, the printed letters themselves vary in size. Since no individual letter fills the entire body, you can see why merely measuring the printed letter will not reveal the point size."9  Moreover,  [**179]   [*628]  because different type style families (now colloquially referred to as "fonts") use the available space differently, "[d]ifferent typefaces having the same point size may appear larger or smaller . . . ."10  Therefore, plaintiff's  [*629]  expert correctly explained at the hearing before the Board of State Canvassers that the space on the top of a printer's block "'becomes a canvas that a type designer gets to work with, and sometimes they use the whole canvas and sometimes they use part of the canvas.'"11  Because type size incorporates some amount of additional space on the printer's block, and because different type style families use that space differently, different sized letters result even when printed from blocks of the same size.
  [**180]  C. WHEN A PETITION IS PRINTED USING COMPUTER GENERATED FONTS, IN ORDER TO ESTABLISH COMPLIANCE WITH THE STATUTORY TYPE SIZE REQUIREMENT, THE PETITION'S PROPONENT MUST SHOW THAT THE FONT USED FAITHFULLY REPLICATES WHAT A TRADITIONAL TYPE BLOCK WOULD HAVE GENERATED.
While these definitions of "point" and "type" are clear based on their customary technical meanings, the confounding issue in this case is how to apply these historical definitions in an age when digital printing predominates. Contrary to Justice Mary Beth KELLY's conclusion, we do not believe that the evidence available to us is sufficiently clear for this Court to take judicial notice that Microsoft's digital fonts replicate the point measure that the Legislature intended. Because digital fonts do not use physical  [***61] printer's blocks, it is not self-evident that the system of digital fonts accurately replicates the movable type point system.12  Plaintiff's  [*630]  Calibri heading may well actually comply with the statutory 14-point type requirement. However, simply choosing a digital "size 14" font does not prove that it is equivalent to the 14-point type standard that the Legislature required when it enacted MCL 168.482.
In light of the fact that no one understood when the Board of State Canvassers held the hearing that plaintiff was obligated to establish this equivalency, it is not hard to understand why its proofs consisted of little more than an attestation that its printer faithfully selected "size 14" Calibri font on his computer. Similarly, this is the reason why Justice Mary Beth Kelly must look outside the record and employ "judicial notice" in order to supply this critical missing set of proofs. Given that the computer  [***62] font used in a petition must faithfully replicate what a movable type of the required point size would have produced in order to satisfy "actual compliance," we are hard pressed to understand how this equivalency could be established without evidence from Microsoft, the producer of the Calibri font used here, about not only how it programmed the font but whether it actually replicates what the traditional printer's type block would have produced.
I do not believe that the pastiche of extrarecord evidence relied on by Justice Mary Beth Kelly establishes these necessary proofs. And if they do, we lack sufficient computer expertise to confirm it.13 
 [**181]   [*631]  Rather, we believe that the proper application of the statutory type size requirement in the context of a digital font requires  [***64] plaintiff to show that a digital font accurately replicates the results that the point system would have generated. If plaintiff can show that the digitized font system it used accurately replicates a 14-point sized type that the point system would have generated, then it would be entitled to have its petition certified as sufficient. However, only with this showing can we know whether plaintiff's "size 14" Calibri font actually satisfied the statutorily mandated 14-point type size under the traditional movable type point system.
Because plaintiff has not proven the connection between its "size 14" font and the statutorily required 14-point type size, we do not believe that it is entitled to mandamus. Therefore, we concur in the decision to reverse the Court of Appeals panel decision on the merits, but we dissent from the decision to grant mandamus. Nevertheless, because the question  [*632]  whether the font system accurately reproduces what the point system would have produced has never been addressed and because a general substantial compliance rule erroneously had been recognized as a means of avoiding the actual requirements of this statute, we would permit a remand to the Board of State  [***65] Canvassers to give plaintiff an opportunity to present proofs under the correct legal standard: that the digital font system actually replicates results that the movable type point system would have generated. Only upon such proof could plaintiff establish that the heading of its petition is in fact "14-point boldfaced type" as that phrase is properly understood.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Brian K. Zahra
Cavanagh, Marilyn Kelly, and Hathaway, JJ. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
We concur in Justice Mary Beth KELLY 's holding that a writ of mandamus should issue in this matter. As a result of our concurrence on this point, Proposition 4 will appear on the ballot.
However, we strongly dissent from the grave actions taken by the justices supporting the position in part III(A) of Justice  Mary Beth KELLY's opinion. Their decision to depart from 30 years of precedent by abandoning the substantial-compliance doctrine throws Michigan's electoral process into chaos and disenfranchises citizens from one of the most basic rights of democracy: the right to vote.
The holding of these justices that a mere clerical technicality—which has not and cannot be shown to create any harm whatsoever—could  [***66] have prevented a referendum vote from taking place, in the face of more  [*633]  than 200,000 citizens who signed the petition to place the referendum on the ballot, is unprecedented and highly disturbing.
That position lacks any sense of the gravity and importance of democracy. Article 1, § 1 of Michigan's Constitution states that "[a]ll political power is inherent in the people. Government is instituted for their equal benefit, security and protection." Furthermore, our Constitution provides  [**182]  that "[t]he legislature shall enact laws to preserve the purity of elections" and "to guard against abuses of the elective franchise . . . ." Const 1963, art 2, § 4. MCL 168.482(2) is one of these laws, and it was intended to protect the election process,14  but four justices have now turned it into a barrier that could prevent a vote from even taking place. Their holding will have a chilling effect on core political speech, and we cannot join this result. As the Court of Appeals so eloquently stated in Senior Accountants, Analysts & Appraisers Ass'n v Detroit, 218 Mich App 263, 270; 553 NW2d 679 (1996):
The wisdom of the principle of judicial restraint expressed by our Supreme Court in [Attorney General v Ingham Circuit Judge, 347 Mich 579; 81 NW2d 349 (1957)],  [***67] is self-evident; the notion that our courts may precipitously intervene in the political arena and preempt a vote of the people is inconsistent with both the role of the courts and the principles of our democracy.
We vote to affirm the Court of Appeals and its issuance of mandamus. As stated, we also concur with Justice  Mary Beth KELLY's issuance of mandamus. As a result, Proposition 4 will appear on the ballot. We note that, given Justice  Mary Beth KELLY's finding of actual compliance—which must necessarily encompass substantial  [*634]  compliance, because actual compliance is a higher standard than substantial compliance—there are four votes that find at least substantial compliance and allow the voters to determine the merits of this proposal. The determination of whether actual or substantial compliance is the proper standard is unnecessary to the decision in this case.
Michael F. Cavanagh
Marilyn Kelly
Diane M. Hathaway
Markman, J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
PROLOGUE
Although to many the present dispute over font size may seem to be "much ado about nothing much" and a debate concerning a mere "technicality,"  [***68] in which there may be only a "dime's width" of difference between what is required of petitions by the law and what is actually contained in the petitions before the Court, a considerably larger issue is implicated: how faithful must the branch of government that interprets the law be to the language adopted by the branch of government that enacts that law? It is important to bear in mind that the very same constitutional provision that provides for the right of referendum also provides that it "must be invoked in the manner prescribed by law," Const 1963, art 2, § 9, and it is the very same Constitution that provides for a representative form of government in which legislative majorities, not the views of a small percentage of the electorate, generally determine the course of public policy. Const 1963, art 4, § 1. As explained by Chief Justice Marshall in Marbury v Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 177; 2 L Ed 60 (1803),  [*635]  which has been the lodestar for generations of judges in questions of statutory construction, the responsibility of a court of law is to declare what the law is, and not what it ought to be. This is one of the first principles of our system of separated constitutional  [***69] powers.
In this case, the law in dispute provides that a petition heading "shall" be in 14-point type, the law has been amended by the Legislature to repudiate the idea of "approximateness," and the law explicitly limits the concept of "substantial compliance"  [**183]  to those circumstances in which a petition has been preapproved by the Secretary of State. The question then becomes whether "14-point type" means 14-point type. It is not, I believe, whether 10- or 12-point type is "close enough," or whether 10- or 12-point type is sufficiently legible, or whether it is "Dickensian," "crabbed," "pedantic," "hairsplitting," or "hypertechnical" to distinguish between 10- or 12-point type and 14-point type. Instead, "we the people" of Michigan have determined that an extraordinary constitutional procedure-- one enabling a small segment of the people to enjoin a duly enacted law for up to two years-- "must be invoked in the manner prescribed by law . . . ." Have the proponents of the present referendum acted "in the manner prescribed by law"? Should this Court, for example, in reviewing a law requiring 200,000 signatures to place a referendum on the ballot, find that 199,250 signatures is sufficient  [***70] and constitutes "substantial compliance"? Should this Court, in reviewing a law establishing a five-year statute of limitations period, find that a lawsuit or prosecution undertaken five years and two months after an event is sufficient and constitutes "substantial compliance"? And should this Court, in reviewing a law requiring that a real estate filing be made within 180 days of some occurrence, find that 185 days is sufficient and constitutes "substantial compliance"? Perhaps it  [*636]  should, but it should also be understood that when the law is "relaxed," or altered, in this manner, the law becomes less certain, more subject to judicial discretion and arbitrariness, less capable of clearly communicating to the people their rights and responsibilities, and more the subject matter of new lawsuits. To allow "substantial compliance" to satisfy the law when this has not been authorized by the Legislature is to accord more power to judges, and less power to legislative bodies and the people whom they represent, to say what the law "is."
It is the obligation of the judiciary to interpret the law in reasonable accord with its language, and I believe this has been accomplished when a law requiring  [***71] that a printed heading be set forth in "14-point type" is interpreted to require "14-point type." It is neither a "strict" construction nor a "narrow" construction to render such an interpretation, but simply a "reasonable" construction-- a construction that ordinary legislators and readers of the law would place upon this language. Had the Legislature been determined to ensure that certain petition headings would always be set forth in 14-point type, and that no gamesmanship would be tolerated in the form of such petitions, how could the Legislature have made this any more clear than by what it said in the law in dispute in this case? How could the Legislature have been any more straightforward in its intention to communicate that "this is what we intend, and only this, no more and no less"? The issue in this case, as it is in most cases before this Court, is more than the significance of a "dime's width" of difference between "14-point type" and a smaller type on a petition; rather, it is which institution of government gets to make decisions regarding what will be provided for in the law-- the branch comprised of persons broadly reflective of the people in their full  [*637]  range of backgrounds,  [***72] interests, and professions, or the branch comprised exclusively of lawyers?
ANALYSIS
To begin with, it must be emphasized that the issue before this Court has nothing to do with our own personal beliefs regarding the wisdom, or the lack thereof, of the emergency financial manager law, or of the constitutionality of this law. Plaintiff is incorrect in its assertion that "the  [**184]  only substantial difference between the petition at bar and the [ones in earlier years that have placed matters on the ballot] is the subject matter and viewpoint of the [plaintiff]." Rather, the only two issues before this Court are (a) whether plaintiff actually complied with the 14-point-type requirement in MCL 168.482(2), and (b) if it did not comply, whether "substantial compliance" with this requirement is tantamount to compliance with the law. Because I would answer both of these questions in the negative, I would reverse that part of the judgment of the Court of Appeals holding that "substantial compliance" with MCL 168.482(2) is sufficient to warrant a grant of mandamus, a position with which the judges of that Court disagreed but nonetheless felt obligated to follow because of an earlier precedent of that  [***73] Court. Pursuant to the clear direction of MCL 168.544d, while "a form prescribed by the secretary of state" must substantially comply with MCL 168.482(2), a form not "prescribed by the secretary of state," as in this case, must actually comply with that law. Therefore, although plaintiff suggests that our interpretation of the 14-point-type requirement in MCL 168.482(2) may prevent a number of petitions from reaching the ballot, each of the other petitions cited by plaintiff was apparently preapproved by the Board of State Canvassers,  [*638]  and thus must only "substantially comply" with the 14-point-type requirement. Further, as highlighted on page 8 of plaintiff's own supplemental brief, even a cursory review of the other petitions will show that each is printed in visibly larger type than that in the instant petition.
(1) Plaintiff seeks a writ of mandamus against defendants. "Mandamus is an extraordinary remedy . . . ." Musselman v Governor, 448 Mich 503, 521; 533 NW2d 237 (1995). The plaintiff in a mandamus proceeding has the difficult burden of proving that the defendant has the clear legal duty to act in the way the plaintiff seeks. Double I Dev Co v Taylor Twp, 372 Mich 264, 269; 125 NW2d 862 (1964).
(2)  [***74] Plaintiff urges this Court to direct that defendants certify for placement on the November 2012 general election ballot the referendum on Public Act 4 of 2011, MCL 141.1501 et seq., the Local Government and School District Accountability Act, commonly known as the emergency financial manager law. Generally, it is the right of the people of Michigan to have public policy determined by a majority of the people's democratically elected representatives in the Legislature. However, "[u]nder the referendum clause of the Constitution [Const 1963, art 2, § 9] one-twentieth of the electors of the State may suspend the operation, until the next general election, of any act of the legislature, however important [with certain exceptions] . . . . Where a power so great as this is vested in a minority of the people, every safeguard provided by law against its irregular . . . exercise should be carefully maintained." Thompson v Vaughan, 192 Mich 512, 522-523; 159 NW 65 (1916).
(3) That is, there are constitutional rights in tension in this case, the constitutional right of the people to  [*639]  have the enactments of representatives respected and given timely effect, i.e., the right to a republican  [***75] form of self-government, see Const 1963, art 4, § 1; US Const, art IV, § 4, and the right of the people under specified circumstances to enjoin the effects of such laws during the referendum process. Const 1963, art 2, § 9. Thompson has properly addressed this tension by both recognizing the importance of the referendum process and insisting that this process, which involves a departure from the ordinary constitutional process by which laws are formulated, be undertaken  [**185]  in a "regular" fashion and in compliance with the law.
(4) Const 1963, art 2, § 9 provides that "[t]he power of referendum . . . must be invoked in the manner prescribed by law . . . ."
(5) MCL 168.482(2) provides:
If the measure to be submitted proposes a constitutional amendment, initiation of legislation, or referendum of legislation, the heading of each part of the petition shall be prepared in the following form and printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type . . . . [Emphasis added.]
As this Court has stated numerous times, the word "shall" constitutes a mandatory directive. See, e.g., Manuel v Gill, 481 Mich 637, 647; 753 NW2d 48 (2008).
(6) That the Legislature in 1965 amended MCL 168.482 by striking the  [***76] language permitting the heading to be in "type of the approximate size set forth" and replaced it with the language, "shall be . . . in 14-point bold face type," underscores that the Legislature meant "shall be" to constitute a mandatory directive. (Emphasis added.)
(7) MCL 168.544d provides:
Nominating petitions for the offices under this act and petitions for a constitutional amendment, initiation of  [*640]  legislation, or referendum of legislation or a local proposal may be circulated on a countywide form. Petitions circulated countywide shall be on a form prescribed by the secretary of state, which form shall be substantially as provided in sections 482, 544a, or 544c, whichever is applicable. The secretary of state may provide for a petition form larger than 8-1/2 inches by 13 inches and shall provide for identification of the city or township in which the person signing the petition is registered. The certificate of the circulator may be on the reverse side of the petition. This section does not prohibit the circulation of petitions on another form prescribed by this act. [Emphasis added.]
Accordingly, while "a form prescribed by the secretary of state" may "substantially comply" with MCL 168.482(2),  [***77] a form not "prescribed by the secretary of state" must actually comply with MCL 168.482(2). To the extent that Bloomfield Charter Twp v Oakland Co Clerk, 253 Mich App 1; 654 NW2d 610 (2002), an opinion of the Court of Appeals, suggests that all petition forms, regardless of whether they were "prescribed by the secretary of state," need only "substantially comply" with MCL 168.482(2), it is wrong, in my judgment, because it is plainly inconsistent with the law. Therefore, I agree with the three other justices who conclude that the "substantial compliance" standard does not apply to forms that have not been "prescribed by the secretary of state."
(8) The form at issue in this case was not "prescribed by the secretary of state" because it was not preapproved by the Secretary of State, and it is not in compliance with the Secretary of State's own rule that the heading "shall be printed in capital letters in 14-point boldface[d] type . . . ." Secretary of State memorandum, Initiative and Referendum Petitions — Prescribed Format (revised June 2011), p 2. Therefore, the form must actually comply with MCL 168.482(2). As explained in the Secretary of State's memorandum,  [*641]  Initiative and Referendum  [***78] Petitions (January 2011), p 1, "While Michigan election law does not require the pre-approval of an initiative or referendum petition form, such approval greatly reduces the risk that signatures collected on the form will be ruled invalid due to formatting defects."
 [**186]  (9) Both MCL 168.482(2) and the Secretary of State's own rule require the heading on the form to be "printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type."
(10) The term "point" in the printing context is defined as "a unit of type measurement equal to . . . 1/72 inch . . . ." Random House Webster's College Dictionary (2d ed, 1997), p 1006; see also Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary (1960), p 652 ("The value of the point is .013837 inch, or nearly 1/72 inch."), and Spicer v Hartford Fire Ins Co, 171 Va 428, 432; 199 SE 499 (1938) ("An inch is the American standard of linear measure. . . . A like standard, while it may not be so generally known, is now used in ascertaining the size of type. . . . [T]he point system of measuring type . . . was adopted in 1886 by the United States Type Founders' Association, although prior to that time many founders were using it.").
(11) The term "type" is defined consistently among dictionaries  [***79] as being "a wood or metal block with a raised character on its surface that, when fixed into a press and coated with ink, prints an impression of the character on paper or a similar absorbent surface" or "a printed character or printed characters." Random House Webster's College Dictionary (2d ed, 1997), p 1391; see also Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary (1960), p 921 ("A rectangular block, usually of metal or wood, having its face so shaped as to produce, in printing, a letter, figure, or other character" or "the letters or characters impressed, collectively."). Therefore,  [*642]  we must determine whether the term "type" in MCL 168.482(2) refers to the blocks used to produce the letters or to the actual printed letters themselves, and, contrary to Justice  Mary Beth KELLY's contention, which of these definitions is ultimately controlling is hardly undisputed. Indeed, this matter is at the very heart of the dispute between plaintiff and the Governor, the Attorney General, and the intervening defendant. Also, contrary to the Chief Justice's and Justice  Mary Beth KELLY's contention, and as is obvious in the language in this very paragraph, I do not "ignore" these alternative definitions, ante  [***80] at 8 n 8, or "omit[] the definition's reference to blocks," ante at 18 n 40. Instead, I see fit to explain exactly why I believe the statute is better understood to incorporate the latter definition. See infra ¶¶ 12-16. Indeed, it is the Chief Justice who defines "type" as "a printed impression from type," ante at 6 n 4, but who "omits" the remainder of that definition that defines type without reference to letter blocks, to wit, "a printed impression from type: printed matter <very small type can be hard to read>."
(12) "Individual words and phrases, while important, should be read in the context of the entire legislative scheme." Mich Props, LLC v Meridian Twp, 491 Mich 518, 528; 817 NW2d 548, 2012 Mich. LEXIS 796, at *8 (2012), issued June 14, 2012 (Docket Nos. 143085-143087 and 143281). In the statute at issue here, the term "type" is used in a provision that states that "the heading of each part of the petition shall be . . . printed in capital letters in 14-point boldfaced type." MCL 168.482(2) (emphasis added). That the Legislature specifically used the words "printed" and "letters" indicates that the Legislature was referring to the actual printed letters rather than the blocks used to make  [***81] these letters. That the Legislature used the word "in" rather than  [*643]  "with" in two relevant places in the statute underscores this interpretation. The Chief Justice gives no consideration at all to this statutory language.
(13) Interpreting "type" to mean the actual printed letters is also consistent with the only reasonable legislative purpose that can be served by MCL 168.482(2), to wit, ensuring that the signers of petitions  [**187]  can easily read what it is that they are signing. Interpreting "type," on the other hand, to mean the blocks used in letter-press printing to produce letters would serve no conceivable purpose because the size of a block says nothing about the size of the letter produced by that block. Thus, requiring the preparer to merely use blocks that are physically 14/72 of an inch in size would permit the actual printed letters on the petition to be of the very smallest and most unreadable size.
(14) It is noteworthy that the Chief Justice, who adopts the block argument, cites a treatise on printing that was written in 1918, but by 1954, when MCL 168.482(2) was originally enacted, there were many other methods of printing in addition to the less advanced letter-press method  [***82] that requires individual blocks. For example, a printing press can use plates and does not require movable letter blocks; and offset printing uses a polyester or metal plate and does not require moveable letter blocks. All of these methods of printing, as well as others, were employed by 1954. Thus, the more reasonable interpretation of "type" is not "a wood or metal block . . . fixed into a press," because this suggests that only printed letters produced by a letter-press are compliant with the statute. This underscores that the "block" definition of "type" unnecessarily focuses on the method of production, rather than on the result of production, the text or type produced. While the former has no bearing on what will  [*644]  actually be read by potential signers of petitions, the latter focuses precisely on what those signers will read. (15) Indeed, given that blocks are increasingly not used in the modern printing industry, it is difficult to conceive of how this Court, or the Secretary of State, or the Board of State Canvassers, or the parties themselves could practically and accurately determine whether the "14-point type" requirement of MCL 168.482(2) has been satisfied in a given instance  [***83] if "type" means blocks. There are no such blocks in this case because the 14-point Calibri font that was used on this petition was not produced by blocks. Indeed, the Calibri font did not even exist when printing blocks were more widely used.
(16) For these reasons, unlike the justices who adopt the printer's-block argument, I do not believe that the 14-point-type requirement of MCL 168.482(2) can be reasonably understood to refer to the size of the blocks used to print the letters; instead, I believe it must refer to the actual printed letters or characters.
(17) That MCL 168.482(2) refers to "the heading," and that "type" refers to "printed characters" or "letters or characters impressed, collectively" suggests that the grouping of letters that comprises the heading should be considered as a whole in determining the point size of the type. This is buttressed by the statute's requirement that "capital letters" must be printed "in 14-point boldfaced type." (Emphasis added.) That the statute specifies that the "letters" must be printed in the specified "type" strongly implies that the "type" must be considered as a whole in evaluating whether the point-size requirement has been satisfied.  [***84] Contrary to Justice  Mary Beth KELLY's contention, I do not conclude that the actual printed characters must each measure 14/72 of an inch high, nor do I adopt different  [*645]  ways of measuring type under MCL 168.482(2), (3), and (5). Rather, when measuring type under any of these statutory provisions, I conclude only that the language must be collectively measured as described in ¶ 18.
(18) As the Court of Appeals explained, the customary practice in the printing industry is to use a specialized printer's ruler to determine the type size of printed text. Stand Up For Democracy v Secretary [**188]  of State,     Mich App    ,     n 10;     NW2d    , 2012 Mich. App. LEXIS 1085, at *27 (2012), issued June 8, 2012 (Docket No. 310047). A typical printer's ruler has a scale to measure points, as well as the graduated-sized letter "E" in order to visually represent the range of type size, known as the "E-scale." To determine the point size of the printed text, the ruler is used to measure the distance in points between the ascender height, e.g., the top of the "h," and the descender height, e.g., the bottom of the "p." Thus, although a document may be printed in 14-point type, the actual point size of each letter will vary  [***85] (e.g., a lowercase "x" will always be significantly less than 14/72 of an inch because it does not contain an ascender or descender). In fact, all individual letters in 14-point type will measure less than 14/72 of an inch because no letter in the English alphabet has both an ascender and a descender. If the printed text does not contain a letter with an ascender and a letter with a descender, the "E-scale" may still be used by comparing an E (or its nearest equivalent) in the text to the ones printed on the ruler. If an "E" in the text measures 14 points on the "E-scale," the type is "in 14-point."
(19) Although it is undisputed that the "font" used in the heading in this case was categorized by the Microsoft software as "14-point," it is also undisputed that the actual size of the printed "type" varies widely depending upon the particular "font" chosen. In other  [*646]  words, a 14-point Calibri font may be of a considerably different type size than a 14-point Arial font. As the Court of Appeals correctly explained, "'font' is not a unit of measurement." Stand Up For Democracy,     Mich App at     n 11, 2012 Mich. App. LEXIS 1085, at *28 (emphasis in original). That the Legislature imposed a "14-point type"  [***86] requirement shows an intent to impose a specific type-size requirement, regardless of the particular font chosen.
(20) Justice  Mary Beth KELLY's finding that there is "actual compliance" turns on the fact that Microsoft "defines 'font size' as the 'size of type . . . .'" Ante at 23. Although she recognizes that Microsoft does not purport in this definition to define "type," she assumes that Microsoft has employed the "printer's block" definition of "type" that she has earlier articulated. However, there is simply no evidence for that conclusion. In fact, the full definition of "font size" provided by Microsoft is:
The size of type, measured in points between the bottom of the descender and the top of the ascender (the vertical point size of a font). Sometimes referred to as the Type or Point Size. [Microsoft Support, WD2002: Definitions of Typography Terms in Word <http://support.microsoft.com/kb/192973/en-us> (accessed August 1, 2012).]
This definition supports my ascender/descender measurement set forth in ¶ 18, and not Justice Mary Beth Kelly's "invisible box" argument. Indeed, the diagram on the very same Microsoft typography page cited by Justice Mary Beth Kelly further illustrates  [***87] that it is the height of the letters-- from highest ascender to lowest descender-- that controls, not the invisible box. For these reasons, I respectfully disagree with Justice Mary Beth Kelly, who concludes that because plaintiff's petition heading is  [*647]  printed in a 14-point font, it "actually complies" with the 14-point-type requirement in MCL 168.482(2). By this analysis, the Legislature's ability to ever impose a specific type-size requirement in order to assure a minimum standard of legibility would be entirely frustrated.
(21) Because the heading on the form here is smaller than 14 points as measured by an E-scale ruler (and considerably so), the form is clearly not in compliance with  [**189]  either MCL 168.482(2) or the Secretary of State's rule. Therefore, plaintiff has failed to satisfy its burden of proving that defendants have any legal duty, much less a clear legal duty, for purposes of mandamus relief to certify the instant referendum for placement on the ballot.
(22) Although plaintiff argues that in the past 15 years at least 14 referendums have been placed on the statewide ballot even though their headings were also not 14 points in size, plaintiff acknowledges that all of those  [***88] referendums were preapproved by the Secretary of State. Given this preapproval, those forms would only have had to "substantially comply" with MCL 168.482(2). Plaintiff, on the other hand, did not seek the Secretary of State's preapproval, and thus was required to actually comply with MCL 168.482(2), which it did not do.
(23) Further, it is telling that on page 8 of plaintiff's own supplemental brief, of the six other petition headings set forth in connection with matters that might appear on this year's ballot, each is in larger type than plaintiff's and five of these are in an identical or nearly identical typeface. While plaintiff may, or may not, be correct that its own heading "stands out for readability," it also stands out in the distinctiveness of its type size. Moreover, as the Board of State Canvassers and the Secretary of State indicate, the six other petitions  [*648]  this year were each preapproved by the board, and thus subject only to substantial compliance with MCL 168.482(2).
(24) Concerning the approach of the remanding justices, I see no benefit to be derived from this approach, and the remanding justices fail to explain what the benefit might be. That is, no matter which  [***89] justice among us has correctly identified the proper method of measuring type, all of the information necessary to assess whether plaintiff's petition satisfies the statute is already before us. See infra ¶¶ 25-27. Given existing time constraints, returning this case to the board would serve no purpose other than to effectively make the board, not this Court, the court of last resort on this issue. Before we do that, I would prefer to make the Court of Appeals the court of last resort, because that is what the Constitution and laws of our state certainly contemplate. I would not remand to the board without first providing it with relevant judicial guidance regarding what the law requires. The board has already deadlocked on the issue of type size and that is why this case is before the Court in the first place.
(25) First, if one adopts the "character size" approach, as I do, a remand is not warranted because MCL 168.482(2) requires the heading to be printed in 14-point type as measured by an E-scale ruler and the intervening defendant has submitted an affidavit that asserts that the heading in this case is not printed in 14-point type as measured by an E-scale ruler, and plaintiff  [***90] has not argued to the contrary. Further, as the Court of Appeals explained, "[b]ecause 14-point is a unit of measurement easily determined by use of an E-scale ruler, neither this Court nor the Board requires expert testimony to determine whether the correct measurement has been met." Stand Up For Democracy,  [*649]      Mich App at     n 10, 2012 Mich. App. LEXIS 1085, at *27. That is, we can determine ourselves that "the heading on plaintiff's petition only measures 12 point on an E-scale ruler," 2012 Mich. App. LEXIS 1085, at *28, and no remand to an expert body is required. What possible benefit would be derived from such a remand?
(26) Second, if one adopts the "printer's block" approach, as do the remanding justices, a remand is again unwarranted. The intervening defendant has also submitted an affidavit that provides that plaintiff's heading is clearly smaller than the  [**190]  same heading printed with a variety of 14-point blocks that it has obtained, and again plaintiff has not argued to the contrary. That is, while the intervening defendant has presented evidence that neither the actual printed letters nor the blocks satisfy the 14-point requirement, plaintiff has presented no contrary evidence. Instead, it has been  [***91] the dominant focus of plaintiff's argument throughout this case that it has "substantially complied" with MCL 168.482(2) and that the difference between the 14-point type required by the statute and the type used in its petition heading, which measures 12 points on an E-scale ruler, amounts to merely a "dime's width of a difference." What possible benefit would be derived from a remand?
(27) Third, if one adopts the "font" approach, as do plaintiff and Justice Mary Beth Kelly, a remand is not warranted given that there is no dispute that plaintiff's petition was in 14-point Calibri font. What possible benefit would be derived from a remand?
(28) Further, for the same reasons that I do not believe that "substantial compliance" constitutes the appropriate legal standard, it is unclear to me how the remanding justices' "faithful replication" standard, in which the board must assess whether the letters produced  [*650]  by Microsoft's 14-point Calibri font are close enough to the letters produced by a 14-point Calibri block, if such a block can even be found, is any different than the "substantial compliance" standard that these justices themselves reject.
(29) For all these reasons, I would reverse  [***92] that part of the judgment of the Court of Appeals holding that "substantial compliance" with MCL 168.482(2) is sufficient to warrant a grant of mandamus.
Stephen J. Markman

 

End of Document
