ing)
I would affirm the district court. The four children never signed either version of the written "family agreement." In addition, as of March 2005, the four children had not agreed orally on a family agreement. In the absence of such an agreement, attorney Frank Pechacek nonetheless went ahead and recorded the deed transferring the property to the four children. He did so because he wanted to get the clock running for Title XIX Medicaid purposes. There is no dispute that his action was authorized by the parents, who were his clients. Subsequently, in April 2005, the children did agree orally to pay the income from the farm to the parents during their lifetime, but as a group they never agreed--either orally or in writing--on an option that would allow Richard to buy the farm. 8 
These are the findings of the district court, and they are all supported by substantial evidence. I also believe the district court sorted through the legal implications of these facts correctly when it (1) refused to set aside the deed while (2) enforcing the children's oral agreement to pay the income from the farm to the parents.
The only claim pled in this case is fraudulent conveyance. The parents did not prove a fraudulent conveyance case. I do not see evidence in the trial record that the parents were actually made insolvent by the transfer, nor do I believe that a transferor (as opposed to a creditor) has standing to complain about a transfer under chapter 684.
Even if the parents had pled some other claim, such as for cancellation or rescission of the deed, I do not think it would be valid. There might be circumstances where one could use parol evidence to prove that a deed that appears to be absolute on its face was actually part of a broader oral agreement. See, e.g., Gardner v. Gardner, 454 N.W.2d 361, 363 (Iowa 1990). But the district court found that the parties never agreed orally that the conveyance of the property was subject to such an agreement.
Contrary to the majority, I believe the district court did consider all the parol evidence and made findings regarding that evidence, which are supported by substantial evidence. The district court found there never was a "package deal." Rather, Pechacek recorded the deed, by his own admission, without having spoken to two of the children. Later, according to the court's findings, the children agreed to turn over the farm income to the parents, but they did not agree to give Richard an option to buy the farm.
Also, I do not consider the examples cited by the majority to be valid forms of parol evidence. Neither Pechacek's "understanding" nor Martha Hansen's "intent" (which are inconsistent with each other) can be used to establish an oral agreement where one does not otherwise exist.
For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully believe that it is inappropriate to reverse and remand here, and would instead affirm.

 

