).
I join Justice Waterman's dissenting opinion. I write separately to discuss the majority's blurring of concepts regarding the law of agency.
To say that an individual may be an agent merely begins the analysis. We need to consider the scope of that person's agency. See In re Estate of Waterman, 847 N.W.2d 560, 574-75 (Iowa 2014). In particular, what was the agent's authority?
The record supports the conclusion that Administrator Furler was one kind of agent. That is, she had authority to carry messages from one supervisor to another. This fact, however, does not establish that a quorum of the supervisors ever held an illegal meeting. As the statute provides, see Iowa Code § 21.2(2), and as we stated in Telegraph Herald, Inc. v. City of Dubuque, 297 N.W.2d 529, 532 (Iowa 1980), a meeting "requires a gathering (in person or by electronic means) of a majority of the members of a governmental body." Serial communications, whether the courier happens to be the mail, a carrier pigeon, Pony Express, or Administrator Furler, do not violate the open meetings law.
A different question would be presented if Administrator Furler were another kind of agent—that is, if she were empowered with decision-making authority. For example, if one of the supervisors delegated to her the authority to work out a restructuring plan with another supervisor, this would be more problematic. In that case, Administrator Furler would be a proxy rather than a conduit.
This distinction is just a matter of common sense. For example, there is a big difference between a baseball team owner telling the general manager to offer a specific salary to a specific free agent and the owner giving the general manager permission to sign free agents for the betterment of the team.
Despite this important distinction, the majority confuses the matter by treating all agencies as if they were identical and using the terms agent, conduit, and proxy interchangeably. As discussed above, a conduit and a proxy are both agents, but they differ as to the scope of their authority. Here the district court found that Administrator Furler was a "conduit" or "messenger." The court did not find that she was a "proxy," nor was such a theory tried. Hence, the court correctly found no violation of the open meetings law.
In my view, our legislature made a logical decision when it allowed members of state and local boards and governing bodies  to communicate privately in advance of public meetings, so long as the communications do not amount to a real-time meeting. It is inherently difficult for decision-making bodies to do all of their business in public. This observation holds true whether the body is a board of supervisors, a legislature, an appellate court, the board of directors of a charity, or the management of a news media organization.
For these reasons, as well as those stated by Justice Waterman, I would affirm the district court.
Waterman and Zager, JJ., join this dissent.

 

