ing)
I respectfully dissent. The district court's order uproots these children, aged five and three, from Hannah, who has always been their primary caregiver, and transfers them to Billy, who has never fulfilled that role. Modification is appropriate only when there has been a material and substantial change of circumstances since the time of the decree that was not contemplated when the decree was entered. In re Marriage of Walton, 577 N.W.2d 869, 870 (Iowa Ct. App. 1998). The change must be more or less permanent and relate to the welfare of the children. Id. The applicant also must carry the heavy burden of showing an ability to offer superior care. Melchiori v. Kooi, 644 N.W.2d 365, 368 (Iowa Ct. App. 2002). "[O]nce custody of children has been fixed it should be disturbed only for the most cogent reasons." In re Marriage of Frederici, 338 N.W.2d 156, 158 (Iowa 1983). I do not believe Billy met those heavy burdens here.
My colleagues and the district court appear to fault Hannah in three areas, none of which in my view individually or collectively justify the outcome in this case. First, there is the contention that Hannah has been "rigid" in her interpretation of the "admittedly confusing" visitation plan. The parties stipulated to a complicated visitation plan in 2006 in order to accommodate Billy's three-days-on, three-days-off 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. work schedule. The plan provided that Billy would have the children for several hours "[d]uring Billy's 3 days off from work that do not cover a weekend" and in addition would have "two weekends of [overnight] visitation which coincide with his weekends off." As I read Billy's testimony, the controversy stemmed from how to handle the situation when Billy's three consecutive work days ended on a Saturday. I do not think Hannah's interpretation of the decree was so unreasonable as to support a modification of physical care.
Second, there is criticism of Hannah for proposing under her new visitation plan that she be able to have the children from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. while Billy is working on "his" weekends. The district court commented, "Hannah fails to grasp the physical and emotional impact such a disruption of visitation time would have on Tyrone and Torance." If Hannah failed to grasp that impact, so did Billy. He testified:
Q. And if you had to work and Hannah didn't have to work, would you prefer Hannah watch the kids? A. Yes.
In any event, I do not believe the inclusion of an unreasonable provision in a proposal to modify visitation should be grounds for transferring physical care to the other party.
Third, there is the claim that Hannah has failed to allow Billy to participate in decisions about the children's schooling and medical care. Again, I think there is less here than meets the eye. As Hannah explained, she enrolled Tyrone in the only local school district that exists. Furthermore, Billy acknowledged that Hannah informed him when she did this. Billy's testimony regarding Tyrone's schooling is revealing:
Q. Who's his teacher? A. I have no idea. He says his teacher is Miss Hamm or Mrs. Hamm is one of his teachers and from what I understand from him.
Q. Have you ever contacted the school and asked who his teacher was? A. No, I have not.
Q. Have you ever contacted the school and asked for a schedule of activities? A. No, I have not . . . .
Q. So if Hannah doesn't give you that information, you're not going to call and get it yourself? A. No. I ask Hannah about it in person.
Similarly, regarding the children's medical care, Billy testified he had no idea who their pediatrician or dentist was, even though he maintained their health insurance (and thus presumably would have seen claim information). He also admitted he had never scheduled a doctor's or dentist's appointment. In addition, he had never taken either child to a doctor's or dentist's appointment. To my mind, this record supports the conclusion that Billy preferred to rely on Hannah to handle these matters.
I am also not convinced that Billy would offer superior care. The district court cites the fact that Billy lives in a somewhat larger home, and that the local public schools are close to that home, thereby saving the bus ride that Tyrone currently has to take to get to his school. But if these were significant factors, the more affluent parent or the parent who resides in a larger town would have an advantage in child custody disputes, which I do not believe to be the case. The district court also cites its belief that a shift into Billy's care will mean that the children's upbringing "can be enriched with both parents' influence." However, given that Billy's abilities as a primary care provider are untested, and the evidence that Billy has in the past willingly delegated that role to Hannah, I would not agree that this prospect of enrichment outweighs the potential loss the children will suffer from being taken away from their lifelong primary caregiver.
I would reverse.

 

