 MANSFIELD  
Concur




MANSFIELD, J., (specially concurring)
It would be difficult to conceive of a less deserving litigant than Richard, whose brutal murder of a college student has led to this situation. However, in my view, even this undeserving litigant should have his arguments presented to us by an attorney.
I agree with my colleagues that the Iowa Code section 600A.8(3) requirements for termination have been met and that termination is in the best interests of the child. Having said that, some aspects of this case give me pause.
The district court treated this matter as if it were simply a termination case. However, one can take the position that the district court was also modifying a dissolution decree. In October 2001, after Richard had already been sentenced to prison for the rest of his life, a Nebraska court entered a final decree of dissolution between Richard and Jeanette. A guardian ad litem had been appointed for O.M.F. The Nebraska court adopted the recommendation of that guardian at litem. In its final decree, the Nebraska court declined to order any visitation of O.M.F. by Richard, but ordered that "following her thirteen[th] birthday [O.M.F.] may visit Respondent as she may choose; and that visitation be established at [O.M.F.'s] own time and circumstance." Thus, the dissolution decree left it up to O.M.F.--when she reaches thirteen--whether to have any relationship with Richard. As Richard points out, by terminating his parental rights, the Iowa district court has effectively modified this aspect of the Nebraska dissolution decree. Furthermore, the Iowa district court was relying in large part upon a circumstance that existed when that decree was entered--namely, Richard's lifetime incarceration.
Typically, to modify a dissolution decree, there has to be a showing of a material change in circumstances. In Nebraska, that appears to be true, even when the modification involves a termination of parental rights. See Timothy T. v. Shireen T., 16 Neb. Ct. App. 142, 741 N.W.2d 452, 459 (Neb. Ct. App. 2007). Also, there is a general requirement that full faith and credit be given to judgments of another state, and a specific federal law protecting "visitation determinations" made by courts of another state. See 28 U.S.C. § 1738A(h).
In his pro se briefing, Richard makes the basic argument that the Iowa district court should have adhered to the earlier decision of the Nebraska district court, but his arguments unsurprisingly are not well-developed. Thus, we do not have the benefit of attorney advocacy for Richard or of Jeannette's responses to that advocacy.
I believe an appellate attorney should have been appointed for Richard. The district court denied Richard's request on the ground that Richard did not have a "colorable defense" to termination of parental rights. Iowa Code § 600A.6A(2). I think that was error. I believe Richard's arguments are sufficiently colorable that an attorney should have been appointed to present them on appeal. However, as my colleagues note, the supreme court also denied Richard's motion for appointment for counsel and, as far as this court is concerned, "that ends it." Thus, bound by the supreme court's order denying appointment of counsel, I concur in the judgment.

 

