 MANSFIELD  
Concur




MANSFIELD, J. (concurring specially)
I agree with the result, but disagree with a portion of the majority's analysis. In section II.B of their opinion, my colleagues rely on a ground for decision that the City of Cambridge did not advance below. Specifically, they state that we cannot review the city council's action in this case because "the record does not contain the city council's decision or a recording of the evidentiary hearing that preceded it. Accordingly, we have nothing to review." My colleagues then cite a workers' compensation case, Alvarez v. IBP, Inc., 696 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2005), as support for this contention. In Alvarez, the supreme court made it clear that Iowa courts should not review the decision of a state agency unless the agency record has been transmitted to them. I do not agree, however, that the same rule applies to city council decisions.
When a state agency action is reviewed, Iowa law requires the agency record to be transmitted to the reviewing court. See Iowa Code §§ 86.26 (2007) (workers' compensation appeals); 17A.19(6) (administrative appeals generally). However, when a city acts in a quasi-judicial manner, as here, the action is typically reviewed by certiorari. See Lewis Investments, Inc. v. City of Iowa City, 703 N.W.2d 180, 185-86 (Iowa 2005). The certiorari rules are different from the laws applicable to state administrative appeals.
The certiorari rules provide that the petition "may be supported by copies of relevant portions of the record of the proceedings being challenged." Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.1402(3) (emphasis added). This is not a requirement. "May" is not "must." See also Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.1410 (stating that the court "may receive any transcript or recording of the original proceeding and such other oral or written evidence explaining the matters contained in the return.") (emphasis added). 3  I believe we are not authorized to rewrite those rules.
Municipalities, school boards, and other local governmental entities often do not have the same resources as the state. See, e.g., Hawkeye Outdoor Adver., Inc. v. Bd. of Adjustment, 356 N.W.2d 544, 547 (Iowa 1984) ("City councils in places such as Algona normally do not make a verbatim record of oral proceedings."). The City of Cambridge, for example, had only 819 residents as of the 2000 census. There is good reason, therefore, for reviews of their actions not to be subject to the same formal requirements as reviews of state agency actions. Instead, the greater flexibility inherent in the certiorari rules makes sense.
Here there was testimony from both Mr. Jensen and Mayor DeYoung about what happened at the September 17, 2007 city council hearing and some of the reasons that were given. There is no doubt that the city declined Jensen's request for designation of his property as a conservation area. After considering all the evidence, the district court concluded that the city council did not act "arbitrarily, capriciously or unreasonably in denying his request for "conservation area' status for his property." I believe our job as a court is now to consider Jensen's appeal on the merits, not to erect a procedural bar that is unsupported by precedent and contrary to the Iowa rules.
Jensen, the party seeking relief, had the burden of showing the city's action in denying conservation area status was arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. Waddell v. Brooke, 684 N.W.2d 185, 189 (Iowa 2004). I would affirm here on the ground that he failed to meet that burden.

 

