 MANSFIELD  
Concur




MANSFIELD, J. (concurring specially)
I cannot agree that there was no confidential relationship here. Robert was seventy-six years old, legally blind, in poor health, and dependent on his wife Madonna in many respects. In matters that required the ability to read documents, such as this insurance transaction, his dependence on her was even greater. Madonna actually handled several aspects of this insurance transaction, including completion of the paperwork and communications with the insurer. Accordingly, while I recognize a confidential relationship does not arise solely because Robert and Madonna were married, Punelli v. Punelli, 364 N.W.2d 259, 261 (Iowa Ct. App. 1984), many other facts were present here. In my view, Robert reposed trust in the skill and integrity of Madonna. Mendenhall v. Judy, 671 N.W.2d 452, 455 (Iowa 2003). I believe it would be wrong to hold that this newly married spouse did not owe a fiduciary duty to her legally blind husband when assisting him with paperwork relating to a premarital asset.
Having said that, I would affirm the district court's thorough opinion on the alternative ground set forth therein. In other words, I would uphold the district court's alternative conclusion that even if a confidential relationship existed, Madonna proved "by clear, satisfactory, and convincing evidence that the grantee acted in good faith throughout the transaction and the grantor acted freely, intelligently, and voluntarily." Jackson v. Schrader, 676 N.W.2d 599, 605 (Iowa 2003). In this regard, I agree with my colleagues that the testimony of Robert's attorney was significant. He testified at length regarding the other two transactions, i.e., Robert's new will devising his personal property and a life estate in his farm to Madonna, and his deed giving Madonna joint tenancy of their home. His testimony leaves no doubt that Robert knew what he was doing and did what he wanted to do. Accordingly, I would affirm, although not on the same grounds as are set forth in the majority opinion.

 

