s)
I respectfully dissent. In my view, the record is clear that Morales was not prejudiced by the implied consent advisory he received. His decision to refuse chemical testing could not have been affected by any omissions from that advisory. Accordingly, I would affirm the revocation of his commercial driver's license.
The majority's analysis centers on a supposed distinction between Iowa laws that are "mandatory" and those that are "directory." In general, I do not think that is a helpful distinction, and the supreme court (in my view correctly) has avoided using it in recent years, except when addressing the consequences of a failure to hold a hearing by a particular deadline. See In re Detention of Fowler, 784 N.W.2d 184 (Iowa 2010).
Apart from special situations like hearing deadlines, I think it is a clearer and better approach just to say that all laws are presumptively mandatory. After all, this is the very essence of what a law is. But saying a law is mandatory does not resolve what we should do when that law is violated. Usually, in our legal system, we deny a party relief when that party has not been affected by the violation of law. Also, different violations of law may warrant different remedies. Our legal system tries to tailor the remedy to the situation.
In the area of implied consent advisories, prior published decisions have followed this approach. They have not mentioned a mandatory/directory distinction. Instead, if the advisory was inaccurate, but the driver could not have been prejudiced, they have simply denied relief. See State v. McCoy, 603 N.W.2d 629, 630 (Iowa 1999) (denying relief for clerical error); Smith v. Department of Transportation, 523 N.W.2d 607, 610 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994) (denying relief when "the mistake did not influence Smith's decision nor was he prejudiced thereby"); see also State v. Bernhard, 657 N.W.2d 469, 472 (Iowa 2003) (denying relief where there was "no reason to assume that [the defendant's] choice would have been different"); cf. State v. Massengale, 745 N.W.2d 499, 503-04 (Iowa 2008) (granting relief where the defendant's decision could have been influenced by the misleading advisory).
I believe those precedents control and should have been followed here. In this case, Morales was told he would lose his privilege to operate a motor vehicle for one year if he refused to consent and would lose his privilege to operate a motor vehicle for six months if he consented and failed the test. The only thing inaccurate about this advisory was it did not convey to Morales that if he consented to testing and failed, he would actually lose his CDL privileges for one year. Thus, the advisory accurately disclosed the potential adverse consequences of refusing to consent, but it understated the potential adverse consequences of a consent. Despite this, Morales refused to consent.
Given these circumstances, no one can argue that the failure of the advisory to comply with Iowa Code section 321J.8 affected Morales's choice. Under the authority of McCoy and Smith, I would deny relief.
The majority's decision appears to open the door to any drunk driver who wants to raise any technical problem in the implied consent advisory, no matter how minor that problem may be. Consider, for example, the possibility of a driver who was not given the CDL portion of the implied consent advisory, but who does not have a CDL. Under the majority's "no exceptions" analysis, she would be able to get the revocation of her license thrown out.
For the foregoing reasons, I dissent.

 

