ing)
I respectfully dissent. Although the majority's opinion is thoughtful and well-written, I believe they are ultimately doing the agency's work, rather than our own. In my view, the legislature did not ask us, as an appellate court, to establish detailed rules for when and where an employee can use offensive language and still receive unemployment benefits upon termination. I believe such decisions are entrusted to the agency. See Myers, 462 N.W.2d at 738 (stating that "[t]he question of whether the use of improper language in the workplace is misconduct is nearly always a fact question . . . . Therefore, whether the event is misconduct is most generally a decision for the agency."). Our job is merely to look at the record as a whole and decide whether substantial evidence supports the finding that claimant was discharged for misconduct, i.e., a deliberate act or omission which constitutes a material breach of the employee's duties and evinces willful or wanton disregard of the employer's interest. Iowa Code § 96.5(2); Iowa Admin. Code r. 871-24.32(1).
Here the administrative law judge, in a thorough decision adopted by the Employment Appeal Board, found the following facts:
The claimant started working for the employer on February 28, 2008. She most recently worked full time as a residential case manager in the employer's organization providing services to persons with disabilities. Her last day of work was October 31, 2008. The employer discharged her on that date. The stated reason for the discharge was insubordination and unprofessional conduct.
On or about October 29 the claimant had some discussions with a program participant/client who was not one of her assigned participants; the participant had expressed a wish to speak to the claimant. The claimant's supervisor, Ms. Brankovic, learned of this and prepared a memorandum of instruction for the claimant as to her contact with non-assigned clients, seeking to direct the claimant's activities and work priorities. On October 30 Ms. Brankovic called the claimant in for a meeting to discuss the memorandum and other issues; Ms. Hamm was also present. During the meeting the claimant expressed her disagreement with the conclusion of the memorandum that she should avoid spending her time speaking with non-assigned clients.
Also during the meeting Ms. Brankovic inquired of the claimant as to whether the claimant had left a voice mail message for a former employee who had gone to work for a government agency with which the employer has a business relationship in which the claimant made the comment that Ms. Brankovic was a "b——." The claimant admitted that she had. Ms. Brankovic responded that this was inappropriate and that there would be further consideration as to whether some disciplinary action should be taken due to the comment.
The claimant was well-acquainted with the former coworker and had previously exchanged complaints with regard to Ms. Brankovic when the coworker was still employed with the employer; she therefore viewed her comment on the voice mail as simply a continuation of a friendly, private communication. However, the former coworker shared the claimant's voice mail with another residential case manager with the employer, who then brought the information to Ms. Brankovic's attention.
After the October 30 discussion the claimant spoke to several coworkers, including subordinate support staff, regarding her discontent with the instruction she had received regarding spending time communicating with non-assigned clients. At least one of those support persons, Ms. Sherwood, felt very uncomfortable with the claimant's discussion of her frustrations with Ms. Brankovic, including in the presence of participant/clients. On the morning of October 31 she continued this by calling a subordinate resident counselor, Ms. Overbeck, and venting her frustrations regarding Ms. Brankovic and the memorandum. During that conversation she again referred to Ms. Brankovic as a "b——." Ms. Overbeck was very uncomfortable with this conduct and reported it to her direct report manager, who reported it to Ms. Brankovic. As a result of this repeated conduct the day after being advised this was inappropriate, the employer determined to discharge the claimant.
My colleagues accept those findings, although they focus on the offensive language alone, perhaps giving insufficient attention to Nolan's overall pattern of insubordination and unprofessionalism. Based on those findings, the ALJ further concluded:
The claimant's insubordination toward her supervisor and unprofessional conduct shows a willful or wanton disregard of the standard of behavior the employer has a right to expect from an employee, as well as an intentional and substantial disregard of the employer's interests and of the employee's duties and obligations to the employer. The employer discharged the claimant for reasons amounting to work-connected misconduct.
I believe these findings are supported by substantial evidence and would affirm.

 

