ing)
I respectfully dissent. Accepting the Board's definition of "good faith," I nonetheless do not believe there is substantial evidence to support its findings.
"Agricultural real estate shall include all tracts of land and the improvements and structures located on them which are in good faith used primarily for agricultural purposes. . ." Iowa Administrative Rule 701-71.1(3). The fighting issue in this case is "good faith." As my colleagues point out, "good faith" is not defined in the rules. I also agree with my colleagues that we cannot view Colvin v. Story County Board of Review, 653 N.W.2d 345 (Iowa 2002), as a binding definition of "good faith," in light of footnote 3 of that opinion. Therefore, I turn to the Property Assessment Appeal Board's decision.
The Board found:
The exhibits and testimony clearly establish that the acreage was used for hay ground, pastureland, and a horse barn as of January 1, 2007, and supports the agricultural classification of this property, despite substantial improvements to the barn and the purchase of one of the three horses occurring after the January 1, 2007, assessment date. Although the appellant incurred a farming loss for 2006, considering startup expenditures, crop loss and the time necessary for developing breeding stock, this does not negate good faith effort or expressed intention of profitability at this early stage of operations.
Although the Board does not state expressly what it meant by "good faith," I read this decision as implicitly equating "good faith" effort with "intention of profitability." That seems to me a reasonable definition. In other words, the property owner's agricultural operation does not actually have to be profitable, but there has to be a genuine intent to make a profit. The "intended profit" standard is also a fair one because it was the one urged by the Jungbluts when they appealed to the Board.
With that standard in mind, I review the evidence before the Board. Historically, the ten-acre parcel in question has been classified as residential. In November 2004, the Jungbluts purchased the parcel for $ 75,900, or more than $ 7,000 per acre. They erected a new 2,500 square foot home. The mortgage amount, following construction of the home, was $ 424,000. The Jungbluts moved into their new home in August 2005. The surrounding parcels are also classified as residential and have substantial homes on them.
The Jungbluts owned two mares they rode for pleasure. 1  In late 2005/early 2006, a barn was completed on the property and the horses were moved from another boarding location onto the property. In the spring of 2006, hay was planted on the property. On April 30, 2006, Mr. Jungblut entered into a hay-cutting agreement with an individual. The agreement provided the individual, in return for cutting the hay, would receive fifty percent of each cutting and would pay market price for the other half. Mr. Jungblut, at his discretion, could keep ten to fifteen percent of the hay. Mr. Jungblut also entered a separate agreement with another individual to plant, till, and fertilize the land for hay.
In 2006, there was no revenue at all from hay or horses. The only revenue was $ 119 from the USDA Direct and Counter-Cyclical Program (DCP), in which the Jungbluts had registered their land. The Jungbluts reported a $ 15,000 loss on their Schedule F.
In 2007, after the relevant assessment date (January 1, 2007), the Jungbluts added stalls and a third horse--i.e., a colt that had just been foaled that spring. The colt is a Percheron, one mare is a half-Arabian, and the other mare is a Morgan. The Jungbluts claimed an eventual plan to engage in horse breeding. However, Mr. Jungblut admitted this is something they had never done before and there is no room for more than three horses on their property. Thus, Mr. Jungblut said his intent was to try to sell stud rights to the colt in a few years after he became full-grown. Yet he admitted, "The market for horses right now is bleak." He also admitted that he "can't speak to profit" from the potential sale of breeding rights.
Reviewing this record, I cannot say it contains substantial evidence that as of January 1, 2007, the Jungbluts planned to make a profit from their agricultural operation. I see not a glint of an actual profit motivation in this record. I would reverse and remand.

 

