ing)
I respectfully dissent. I believe the district court had authority to enter a nunc pro tunc order altering the sequence of two paragraphs of its decree to conform to its original intent. Although the court did not use the specific words "nunc pro tunc" in its August 3, 2009 order, that is not essential. The court offered a detailed explanation for what it was doing and why:
It was the intention of the court to divide nearly equally the assets of the parties including an equalization of the values of the two parcels of real estate. Requiring respondent to pay to petitioner the sum of $ 24,128.50 from his share [o]f the assets accomplished that goal. That amount properly should be paid by respondent to petitioner from Respondent's share of the marital assets. The decree did not [e]ffect that result and will now be amended accordingly.
This was a permissible exercise of nunc pro tunc authority. Nunc pro tunc orders can be used to correct obvious errors or to make an order conform to the judge's original intent. See, e.g., State v. Johnson, 744 N.W.2d 646, 648 (Iowa 2008). While a nunc pro tunc order may not be used when the judge's intent changes, e.g., to correct judicial thinking, a judicial conclusion, or a mistake of law, id., in this case, Judge Moon was simply amending the language of the decree to what he had actually intended. His order makes this quite clear. The judge previously made an inadvertent arithmetical error in failing to recognize that when a party receives a specific amount directly out of the sale proceeds of marital property she has essentially received an equalization payment of only one-half that amount. He explained that error and fixed it. See id. ("In reviewing a nunc pro tunc order, this court has declared that the intent of the trial judge is critical.").
While I share my colleagues' concern that property divisions in dissolution decrees should have a high degree of finality, in this case both parties were enlisting the court's assistance anyway. The process of splitting up the property was still in progress. I would affirm.

 

