 MANSFIELD  
Concur




MANSFIELD, J. (concurring specially)
The majority opinion is a very thorough and thoughtful treatment of this complex insurance dispute. I agree with the result, and join in most of the court's opinion. My only disagreement is a narrow one pertaining to part V of the court's opinion.
The relevant policy language discussed in part V provides coverage for injury arising out of "wrongful entry into . . . a room, dwelling or premises that a person occupies, committed by or on behalf of its owner . . . ." APIS is being sued, in part, for wrongfully entering and remaining on the Casino and Community Center on or about October 1, 2003. APIS maintains that it entered these buildings at the behest of an entity that it believed to be the true owner. Accordingly, APIS contends that coverage exists under the personal and advertising injury provisions. Scottsdale disputes these points, asserting (1) APIS did not enter the Casino and Community Center on behalf of its true "owner" and (2) these buildings were not occupied by a natural "person." The majority opinion accepts Scottsdale's first argument and does not reach the second. I would rely on Scottsdale's second argument, because I disagree with Scottsdale's first argument.
It is true that any wrongful entry must have been committed by or on behalf of the owner to trigger coverage. See U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co. v. Goodwin, 950 F. Supp. 24, 27 (D. Me. 1996) ("the provision unambiguously requires that the wrongful entry be committed by the owner, landlord, or lessor of the room, dwelling, or premises"). The problem here is that it remains unclear who was the "owner" of the Casino and Community Center as of October 1, 2003. Although the Tribe alleges in its petition that APIS lacked authority from the Tribe to enter the Casino and Community Center, the underlying facts are more complicated. As set forth in the summary judgment record and part I of the court's opinion, two different councils claimed to represent the Tribe at that time. APIS had authority from one of those councils. Thus, it is possible, given the record before us, that APIS could successfully defend the Tribe's lawsuit by establishing that it had permission to enter from an entity that had ownership rights to the buildings as of October 1, 2003. That being the case, if only this portion of the policy language were at issue, I believe Scottsdale would have a duty to defend and, potentially, a duty to indemnify.
As demonstrated very ably in part III of the court's opinion, the "facts that may be considered" in this case are not limited to the petition that has been filed against the insured. In part V of the opinion, I respectfully believe the majority may have disregarded that lesson and focused solely on the wording of the petition, to the exclusion of the broader factual context of this dispute.
However, I nonetheless agree with the majority's ultimate determination that the personal and advertising injury provisions do not afford coverage to APIS in this case. In my view, those provisions do not apply here because, as Scottsdale points out, the Casino and Community Center were not occupied by a natural "person." Case law from certain other jurisdictions offers support for Scottsdale's position. See 47 Mamaroneck Ave. Corp. v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 50 A.D.3d 952, 857 N.Y.S.2d 610, 611 (N.Y. App. Div. 2008) (holding that eviction of a commercial tenant that was not a natural person was "not covered by the definition of 'personal and advertising injury'"); Mirpad, L.L.C. v. Calif. Ins. Guarantee Assn., 132 Cal. App. 4th 1058, 34 Cal. Rptr. 3d 136, 144-47 (Cal Ct. App. 2005) ("such coverage should not extend to the wrongful eviction of 'organizations'"). While the Seventh Circuit apparently has a different view, see Supreme Laundry Serv., L.L.C. v. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co., 521 F.3d 743, 747-48 (7th Cir. 2008) ("we will not read 'person' in this CGL policy to refer to simply natural persons when it can plausibly apply to a corporate entity"), from my reading of the policy language and the case law I am more persuaded by the decisions of the intermediate appellate courts in California and New York.
With the foregoing qualification, I join in my colleague's excellent opinion.

 

