ing)
I respectfully dissent and would affirm the defendant's convictions in their entirety.
This is an appeal from what appears to be Vela's fourth conviction for a crime involving domestic abuse. His presentence report details a lengthy criminal history, running over five full pages, and including convictions for going armed, assault with injury, aggravated battery, domestic battery, domestic assault with injury, domestic assault, assault, criminal mischief, willful injury, and domestic abuse. The record amply supports the district court's conclusion that:
I don't think your needs can be met outside of the prison setting, and I believe that . . . incarceration is the most appropriate alternative . . . so that you can at least once again try to get your life straightened [out], and at the same time assure that you are not going to commit other offenses.
The only issue Vela has raised on appeal relates to the jury instructions, not to sufficiency of evidence. Vela contends his counsel was ineffective because he did not request an instruction defining "household members" to assist the jury in deciding whether Vela's most recent assault involved domestic abuse. I agree that Vela's counsel should have asked for the jury instruction, but I do not believe Vela can demonstrate prejudice.
There is ample evidence in my view that Vela and the victim were members of the same household because they were "cohabiting" within the meaning of Iowa Code section 236.2(4). The victim testified that she and Vela were "in a relationship together" and that he was her "boyfriend." She further testified that during the relationship, they lived together for a period of six months at her apartment. In closing argument, Vela's own counsel referred to the victim as Vela's "live-in girlfriend."
In addition to the victim's testimony, we have that of her mother. The victim's mother explained that her daughter called her on the phone from the party as she and Vela were leaving. The mother overheard Vela threatening her daughter in what appeared to be a fit of jealousy: "[H]e had called my daughter a nigger lover and told her that's all she wants." The mother got in the car immediately, but when she caught up with her daughter, she was already bleeding from Vela's blows. The mother confirmed that Vela and the victim were "living together" in the apartment.
In short, this is far from the "mere roommates" situation that the supreme court referred to in State v. Kellogg, 542 N.W.2d 514, 518 (Iowa 1996). Rather, the undisputed evidence indicates that Vela and the victim were living together as part of a romantic relationship.

 

