ing)
I respectfully dissent. I agree with parts A.1, B, C, and D of my colleagues' opinion, but I cannot find the admission of the hearsay was harmless error.
Alexis died a horrible death, and the evidence points toward Matthew Elliott having been responsible for that death. But without Benjamin's report of what happened, the State's case was not overwhelming. Rather, it was a case dependent upon the problematic testimony of Kristina, Gilbert, and Jean.
On the morning of Alexis's death, Kristina repeatedly told the medical personnel, the DHS, and the police over a period of several hours that Alexis had gone to sleep with her that night. "I went to bed that night and she was with me, and I woke up and she was like that." Kristina even performed a reenactment, purporting to show how Alexis had gone to sleep with her.
Gilbert also told the authorities originally that Alexis had gone to bed with Kristina and that he saw Alexis and Kristina on a couch together at 2 a.m.
Jean likewise made statements incriminating her daughter Kristina. She said that before leaving the house at 5:15 a.m., she heard baby noises coming from the upstairs bedroom where Kristina slept.
Later in the day, Detective Castelline called Kristina, Gilbert, and their mother Jean to the police station for further questioning, telling them their stories were not consistent. The three of them drove together in one car to the station. At the station, the stories changed. Each of them disclosed Elliott's presence in the house and stated that Alexis had gone to sleep with Elliott that night. Kristina also stated that Elliott had carried Alexis's body upstairs in the morning and said, "You got to help me. She's not breathing." Gilbert described calling 911 with Elliott's assistance.
Kristina, Gilbert, and Jean explained at trial that they initially kept quiet regarding Elliott's involvement because they were concerned about having a fugitive in the house. Defense counsel argued, on the other hand, that the original version as to who had gone to bed with Alexis was correct and the family was fabricating a story to protect Kristina. Defense counsel also argued it was improbable that Kristina would have told a false story over and over again, effectively assuming responsibility for her own child's death, if the baby had not actually been with her.
This was not all that defense counsel had to work with. Even at the time of trial, Gilbert described Elliott as calm, mellow, and very caring and careful with Alexis. He stated that Kristina, on the other hand, had a temper, and would give Alexis a "swat" at times. Like Gilbert, Jean characterized Elliott as "kind," "calm," and "quiet," as someone who never displayed a temper, never got physical, and always got along with everyone. By contrast, Jean characterized her own daughter as a person with a temper, who was "like a little hothead," who called her a bitch all the time, and who had to be reprimanded for being rough with Alexis. Both Gilbert and Jean described Kristina as frequently frustrated with and resentful of parenting duties. Jean essentially admitted that her first suspicions were directed at her own daughter. Upon learning of Alexis's plight, she had confronted her daughter and asked, "Did you do this to your child? Do you know anything? Are you saying anything?"
There is no Confrontation Clause issue in this case. Benjamin did testify, and was determined to be "available" by the district court. Defense counsel had an opportunity to cross-examine him. This means the State does not have to establish that admission of the hearsay was "harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Wells, 738 N.W.2d 214, 218 (Iowa 2007). Still, to prevail on its harmless error argument, where the State bears the burden, the State must show that admission of the evidence did not "injuriously affect" Elliott's rights. State v. Newell, 710 N.W.2d 6, 19 (Iowa 2006). I cannot so find.
When Officer Castelline was allowed to testify as to what Benjamin had told him, the jury learned that Benjamin apparently woke up that terrible morning, came down the stairs, and saw Elliott and Alexis together. According to Benjamin, Alexis's "head didn't look right." Benjamin went upstairs to get Alexis's mother, and then Elliott brought Alexis's body upstairs with him.
While I agree that some of this information also was related by other trial witnesses, we need to remember who those other witnesses were: the other family members. Initially, and repeatedly, they had told the authorities Alexis had been with Kristina. Thus, their trial testimony was potentially vulnerable to a defense claim that it was cooked up after the fact to protect Kristina--precisely the theory Elliott's lawyers advanced. Benjamin's report as related by Officer Castelline, however, plugged this hole in the prosecution's case.
Furthermore, we have a good idea of the importance of Officer Castelline's testimony from the jury question discussed in part C of my colleagues? opinion. Three hours into their deliberations, which ended up lasting over two days, the jury sent a note to the judge, "Can we consider the final testimony of Detective Castelline about what [Benjamin] told the detective to be evidence in support of fact[s] in this case? We are aware of Instruction No. 20 [the limiting instruction]." The district court told the jury to "read the instructions." I have difficulty viewing Officer Castelline's testimony about Benjamin's statements as merely cumulative, when the jury specifically wrote a note asking the district court if they could consider it as substantive evidence.
This case was well tried by the district court, the county attorney's office, and the public defender's office. Regrettably, I believe the erroneous admission of hearsay necessitates a new trial.

 

