).
I respectfully dissent. I believe the court is looking at the wrong law, thereby leading it to the wrong result.
 The restitution statute authorizes "payment of pecuniary damages to a victim." Iowa Code § 910.1(4) (2016). "Pecuniary damages" means
all damages to the extent not paid by an insurer on an insurance claim by the victim, which a victim could recover against the offender in a civil action arising out of the same facts or event, except punitive damages and damages for pain, suffering, mental anguish, and loss of consortium.
Id. § 910.1(3). So the relevant question is what damages could Jordan Hagedon, the victim, recover from Terran Roache, the defendant, in a civil action.
As the court ultimately recognizes, this is an issue of damages, not scope of liability. The loss of the CDL study guide was certainly within the scope of liability; Roache took the backpack that contained this study guide. The Third Restatement has not yet addressed the subject of damages for intentional torts to property. See Restatement (Third) of Torts: Liab. for Physical & Emotional Harm Introduction, at 1-2 (Am. Law Inst. 2010) ("Determining the recoverable damages and their amount is beyond the scope of this Restatement and remains within the Second Restatement's coverage until future installments of the Restatement Third, Torts."). Hence, we revert to prior law.
The Second Restatement provides that damages for conversion of a chattel include the value of the chattel and "the amount of any further pecuniary loss of which the deprivation has been a legal cause." Restatement (Second) of Torts § 927, at 534 (Am. Law Inst. 1979). In State v. Taylor, which involved court-ordered restitution in a theft case, we quoted and relied on this provision. See 506 N.W.2d 767, 768, 769 (Iowa 1993). There we concluded that theft was analogous to conversion, and the university's recoverable restitution in a theft case included not only the uninsured loss but also $14,425 for the audit the university had to perform. Id. at 768-69.
So the only issue for me is whether Hagedon in fact has to pay the fine. The record leaves some doubt.
It is notable that Hagedon agreed in writing at the outset to pay a fine if the copyrighted study guide was not returned. After the theft occurred, and before it had been solved, Hagedon signed a further agreement to pay $1900 for the loss of the study guide. I give weight to this agreement because it was not developed for purposes of the restitution hearing but was in fact a binding, arm's length commitment by Hagedon to pay $1900.
On the other hand, Hagedon's testimony at the restitution hearing was inconclusive. He said he was told Northland has charged the $1900 in the past, but he did not know if he would actually be charged the $1900 if he was unable to get it included in the restitution award.
The district court found,
The "damage" to the victim for failing to return the study guide came to $1,900. But for [Roache's] criminal actions, [Hagedon] would not have been assessed that "fine." The Court would presume that $1,900 far exceeds the actual cost to print the study guide, but the actual cost of the study guide does not reimburse [Hagedon] for the loss he sustained as a result of [Roache's] actions. The amount claimed for damages for Jordan Hagedon is approved in the amount of $1,900.00 for the study guide and $500.00 for his insurance deductible.
The majority correctly states that restitution proceedings are reviewed for correction of errors at law. See State v. Hagen, 840 N.W.2d 140, 144 (Iowa 2013). If substantial evidence supports the district court's factual finding, we are bound to  affirm it. See id. Because substantial evidence supports the fact-finding here, I would affirm. Although the evidence would probably also support a contrary finding that Hagedon is not actually obligated to pay the $1900, it is not our job to reweigh the evidence.
I do not think liquidated-damages caselaw has much relevance here. This isn't a breach of contract case between Hagedon and Northland CDL Training & Licensing, subject to a breach-of-contract measure of damages. It's a hypothetical tort claim by Hagedon against Roache. Usually tort defendants must compensate victims as they find them.
More relevant, in my view, is a decision of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa addressing tort damages in a somewhat analogous situation. In Iowa, Chicago & Eastern Railroad Corp. v. Pay Load, Inc., a truck driver employed by the defendant failed to stop at a grade crossing, resulting in a train-truck collision that totally destroyed a locomotive the plaintiff had been leasing from a third party. 348 F. Supp. 2d 1045, 1048-49 (N.D. Iowa 2004). Applying Restatement (Second) of Torts § 927, and comment m thereto,5  the federal district court noted,
Here, under the terms of the lease, IC & E is obligated, upon demand by First Union, in the event of loss or destruction of a locomotive, to pay First Union a pre-determined amount as set forth in a Stipulated Loss Schedule which is attached to the lease. Such a loss appears to fall squarely within the framework of comment m. Moreover, such a result is in keeping with the principles underlying the allowance of damages in tort actions.
Id. at 1053. The court went on to conclude that "in order to permit IC & E full compensation it will be entitled to seek to recover the amount set forth in the lease's Stipulated Loss Schedule." Id. However, "if the evidence at trial establishes that IC & E will not be required to pay First Union the amount set forth in the lease's Stipulated Loss Schedule, but instead a lesser amount, IC & E will not be permitted to seek such damages." Id.
This simple and straightforward analysis should apply with equal force here. If Hagedon will have to pay the $1900, it should be awarded as restitution; if not, it shouldn't. Substantial evidence supports the district court finding that Hagedon actually owes the $1900.
Rather than giving us a clear and precise explanation for why it is overturning the district court's award of restitution, the majority offers a series of partial explanations. I find them unpersuasive.
For example, the majority states that Roache should not have to indemnify Hagedon for the $1900 because Hagedon "simply acknowledged" this amount "without expressly agreeing to pay it." I do not follow this distinction. After the theft, Hagedon agreed in writing that he "will be charged" the $1900. To me, that is an agreement to pay it. Again, notwithstanding the text of the written agreement, Hagedon could not confirm at the hearing that he actually would be charged the $1900 if it wasn't included in the restitution award. Still, there was enough in the record to sustain the district court's finding that an actual loss of $1900 would be incurred by Hagedon.
 Next, consider the duo of cases cited by the majority relating to the recovery of medical expenses in personal injury cases. Undeniably, our law limits injured plaintiffs to recovery of "reasonable and necessary" costs of medical care. Pexa v. Auto Owners Ins., 686 N.W.2d 150, 156 (Iowa 2004); see also Stanley v. State, 197 N.W.2d 599, 606 (Iowa 1972). We have a long-standing corollary rule that in proving the reasonable value of medical services, the amount billed is relevant only if it has been paid or if an expert witness testified to its reasonableness. See Pexa, 686 N.W.2d at 156; Stanley, 197 N.W.2d at 606-07. Any patient who receives a bill nowadays from a health care provider would understand why we have that rule and would agree that it makes sense. But it is a rule for medical expenses in personal injury cases, not for every category of tort damages. The court's implication to the contrary is incorrect. Compare Restatement (Second) of Torts § 927, at 534 (relating to damages for conversion or destruction of a thing), with id. § 924, at 523 (relating to personal injury damages and indicating that reasonable medical expenses are recoverable).
Nor is this a case like State v. Bonstetter, 637 N.W.2d 161 (Iowa 2001). The issue there, as in Taylor, was whether the cost of an audit could be recovered. Id. at 168. But no evidence was presented except the $19,763 auditor's bill. Id. at 169-70. We concluded,
[P]resentation to the court of the bill alone is not enough to prove the costs of the audit are necessary, fair, and reasonable. Some other proof is necessary before we can conclude the audit was a reasonable, fair, and necessary element of damage.
Id. at 170.
I think it is self-evident that a $19,763 audit bill as a restitution item in an embezzlement case is not self-explanatory and requires something more than just the bill. Notably, we said in Bonstetter that testimony from a witness that the audit fees were "necessary, fair, and reasonable" was not required; all that was needed was "evidence to support the conclusion the audit is necessary, fair, and reasonable." Id. at 169. Here, by contrast, the State submitted more than a bill: it presented two separate contracts plus testimony from Hagedon.
Most of all, as I've already noted, the majority relies on liquidated damages law. But even if this body of contract law were relevant, I would disagree with the majority's liquidated-damages analysis.
To begin with, the $1900 are not liquidated damages. This amount was agreed upon after the breach occurred, not before. Cf. Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 356 cmt. a, at 157 (Am. Law Inst. 1981) (explaining that a liquidated-damages clause "effectively provide[s] in advance the damages that are to be payable in the event breach"). "In a contract of accord for breach of a previously broken contract, the parties may agree on what terms of settlement they will accept . . ., however unfavorable the accord may be to the party in default." 24 Richard A. Lord, Williston on Contracts § 65:5 (4th ed.), Westlaw (database updated Nov. 2018).
Additionally, even if the $1900 could be viewed as liquidated damages, the majority misallocates the burden of proof. Under our caselaw, stipulated-damages clauses are presumptively valid. See Gordon v. Pfab, 246 N.W.2d 283, 288 (Iowa 1976) ("A party who contends that a liquidation clause is in reality a penalty has the burden to plead that fact and prove the actual damages in the trial court."); see also Heaberlin v. Heaberlin, 255 Iowa 403, 409, 122 N.W.2d 841, 844 (1963) (citing cases). It is  not the proponent's burden to prove validity of the clause, but the burden of the party contesting the clause to prove its invalidity.
Nor is the issue the "value" of the study guide. Rather, the issue is the potential damage that would befall Northland if its copyrighted, proprietary study guide began to circulate, where others could copy it for their purposes such as to offer their own CDL course. How much is that damage, and how difficult is it to estimate? See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 356 cmt. b, at 158 ("The greater the difficulty either of proving that loss has occurred or of establishing its amount with the requisite certainty, the easier it is to show that the amount fixed is reasonable.").
Lastly, whether the $1900 is denominated a fine or liquidated damages in the parties' agreements has little significance. See id. cmt. c, at 159 ("Neither the parties' actual intention as to its validity nor their characterization of the term as one for liquidated damages or a penalty is significant in determining whether the term is valid.").
For the foregoing reasons, I would uphold the district court's restitution award as supported by substantial evidence. In my view, the majority's criticisms are more aptly directed to our laws regarding fines, surcharges, and restitution generally, rather than to anything the district court or anyone else did in this particular case.

 

