ing)
I respectfully dissent. Given the strong evidence of Barnes's guilt, I do not believe he was prejudiced by his trial counsel's failure to request the accomplice corroboration instruction.
Putting aside for now the testimony of Barnes's putative accomplices, the record shows the following: In March 2006, Barnes had been given some pigs and had nowhere to keep them. He brought them to his sister and brother-in-law (the Bellcocks) and asked to keep them on their property while he (Barnes) took care of them. In that same area of the acreage, the Bellcocks had a new $ 1500 riding lawn mower. Two months later, Barnes moved to Kansas and stopped caring for the pigs. The Bellcocks got tired of the effort and expense of taking care of the pigs, and did not know how to reach Barnes, so they sold them.
Doug Geibe, an acquaintance of Barnes, testified that sometime during the spring/summer of 2007, he spoke with Barnes (who was now back in Iowa). Geibe told Barnes that his mower was broken down and he needed a new mower. Barnes said he had "access" to a mower and was going to be picking up a mower from his sister's. As Geibe testified, Barnes said "[s]omething about he'd had some hogs or something and she'd taken them, sold them, she apparently owed him some money over that particular deal and she had a lawn mower and was going to give it to him in exchange for the debt that she owed him."
On April 6, 2007, the Bellcocks' riding lawn mower was reported stolen. It turned out that the stolen mower had been brought to a pawn shop in Ames on April 4, 2007. The pawn shop paperwork contained the signature and fingerprint of Brandi Rex.
With this trial evidence as backdrop, we now consider the testimony of Brandi Rex and Brian Sayer. Rex testified that that Barnes was her boyfriend in Kansas and they moved from Kansas to Iowa in March 2007. She testified that Barnes was "real mad" at his sister. Specifically, Barnes told Rex that he had had some hogs that had cost him $ 1600 to raise and fatten. While Barnes was in Kansas, his sister had taken the hogs and sold them.
Rex further testified that on April 4, 2007, she, Brian Sayer, and Barnes went out to Barnes's truck. The mower in question was already in the back of the truck, covered by a tarp. Barnes told her at that time he had obtained the mower in a trade. They delivered the mower to the pawn shop, where Rex signed the paperwork. Barnes later admitted to her that he had stolen the mower from the Bellcocks.
Sayer testified that on the night before the trip to the pawn shop, Barnes, himself, and others were sitting around drinking beer. Barnes asked the members of the group to help him steal a mower. Sayer declined, but another individual in the group agreed. They left. About an hour and a half later Barnes returned and said they got the mower. Barnes then asked Sayer if he would go to Ames with him and help him pawn the mower. Sayer agreed. The next day, Sayer went with Barnes and Rex to retrieve Barnes's parked truck, which had the mower. They stopped at a hardware store while Sayer purchased a key for the mower. Then they went to Ames to pawn the mower. Rex filled out the paperwork, and the mower was pawned.
The State contends that Rex and Sayer were not even accomplices, so no accomplice corroboration instruction was warranted. I think the State has a valid point as to Rex. She did not know the mower was stolen when they went to the pawn shop.
Regardless, I do not believe an accomplice instruction would have made a difference. Otherwise stated, I see no a reasonable probability that the outcome of the trial would have been different. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 694, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2064, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 693 (1984); State v. Hildebrant, 405 N.W.2d 839, 841 (Iowa 1987). Because of my views on this issue, and because I believe that the other grounds raised by Barnes are also insufficient to merit reversal, I would affirm Barnes's convictions and sentence.

 

