 specially).
I concur in the result only. I would decide this case under established Fourth Amendment law rather than under a new interpretation of article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution.
In the present case, law enforcement conducted a roadside inventory search of an impounded vehicle and found methamphetamine and a glass pipe inside a drawstring cloth bag on the floorboard by  the gas pedal. I would find this search did not comply with Fourth Amendment standards. The State failed to offer any evidence of an inventory search policy regarding closed containers and thus fell short of what the United States Supreme Court required, unanimously, in Florida v. Wells, 495 U.S. 1, 4-5, 110 S. Ct. 1632, 1635, 109 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1990).
 I. The Inventory Search Violated the Fourth Amendment.
In Wells, the Court found the opening of a locked suitcase stored in a trunk pursuant to an inventory search violated the Fourth Amendment. Id. at 2, 5, 110 S. Ct. at 1634-35. Critically, "the record contained no evidence of any Highway Patrol policy on the opening of closed containers found during inventory searches." Id. at 3, 110 S. Ct. at 1634. The Court went on,
Our view that standardized criteria, or established routine, must regulate the opening of containers found during inventory searches is based on the principle that an inventory search must not be a ruse for a general rummaging in order to discover incriminating evidence. The policy or practice governing inventory searches should be designed to produce an inventory. The individual police officer must not be allowed so much latitude that inventory searches are turned into "a purposeful and general means of discovering evidence of crime."
Id. at 4, 110 S. Ct. at 1635 (citations omitted) (quoting Colorado v. Bertine, 479 U.S. 367, 376, 107 S. Ct. 738, 743, 93 L. Ed. 2d 739 (1987) (Blackmun, J., concurring)).
We have not had difficulty applying Wells in the past. See, e.g., State v. Huisman, 544 N.W.2d 433, 440-41 (Iowa 1996) (upholding an inventory search conducted under a standard policy which stated that "[a]ll vehicles impounded at the direction of a member of the Department will be fully inventoried, and the proper Impound Form will be prepared. This includes all containers which may hold valuables or other personal property, even if closed"); State v. Jackson, 542 N.W.2d 842, 845-46 (Iowa 1996) (upholding an inventory search under the Fourth Amendment where there was "ample, uncontroverted testimony that the patrol department in the present case had standardized inventory criteria that included opening all locked and unlocked containers and inventorying the containers' contents"). We can apply Wells today.
The majority recites the facts correctly, though with insufficient detail for my purposes. On October 30, 2015, around 6:30 a.m., Jasper County Deputy John Burdt was stationed in his patrol car along Highway 14 in Newton. He had received a report of a vehicle being driven recklessly. As the vehicle passed, Deputy Burdt noticed its rear license plate was not illuminated. Deputy Burdt initiated a stop for this traffic violation.
While making the stop, Deputy Burdt determined the vehicle's registration sticker did not match its license plate and the plate had expired in 2013. The driver, Bion Ingram, was also unable to produce a copy of the registration or proof of insurance for the vehicle. Deputy Burdt informed Ingram, who was on his way to work, that the vehicle was going to be impounded and towed due to the improper use of a registration.
Deputy Burdt did not arrest Ingram. Instead, he offered to give him a ride to the nearest gas station so he could be picked up and taken to work. Ingram accepted this arrangement and called for a ride on his cell phone. Ingram asked about getting his work tools out of the vehicle. Deputy Burdt informed Ingram this could be done after the citations were completed.
 Meanwhile, Newton Police Officer Bernard Eckert had arrived on the scene. Deputy Burdt informed Ingram that the vehicle was going to be inventoried and inquired if there was anything in it of high value "as a protection to all individuals involved." Ingram said there wasn't.
Because Deputy Burdt wanted Ingram to be able to get to work as quickly as possible, Deputy Burdt asked Officer Eckert to remove the license plates and perform an inventory of the vehicle while Deputy Burdt worked on the citations.
Officer Eckert completed his inventory on a Newton Police Department form. The form had spaces to fill in the name of the officer performing the inventory; the date, place, and time of the inventory; descriptive information on the vehicle; the names and addresses of the owner and the driver;7  and the locations where the vehicle was being secured and where the keys would be. The inventory form also had spaces for listing "items of value." Additionally, there were spaces to list "criminal evidence found," the "location" where each item of such evidence had been found, and where the evidence had been subsequently "placed."
In the course of the inventory, Officer Eckert found a drawstring cloth bag on the floorboard of the driver's seat by the gas pedal. The bag was of a size that could have contained a small gun or valuables. Instead, it held a glass pipe and what a field test determined to be approximately one gram of methamphetamine. Officer Eckert wrote down these items under "criminal evidence found." On the inventory form, he also identified a "power converter" and "various tools" as "items of value."
Deputy Burdt testified at the suppression hearing. His testimony indicated the Jasper County Sheriff's Office has "an actual manual or policy on inventorying towed vehicles." However, the policy itself was not introduced into evidence. Instead, Deputy Burdt explained,
It's common policy—or common any time a vehicle is towed that we do a vehicle inventory for documentation of the vehicle being towed, where it's going, what's the contents of the vehicle, and where—where is it being towed to.
Notably, no evidence was presented that the sheriff's office policy addressed closed containers either directly or by implication.
Furthermore, Officer Eckert of the Newton Police Department was the one who actually performed the inventory using the police department's form. Officer Eckert did not testify at the suppression hearing. No evidence was presented at the suppression hearing as to the Newton Police Department's inventory search policy, let alone as to a policy regarding closed containers.
In Wells, the Court emphasized there had to be an actual policy on closed containers. 495 U.S. at 4-5, 110 S. Ct. at 1635. The search there was invalid because the policy manual that had been introduced into evidence "fail[ed] to address the question." State v. Wells, 539 So. 2d 464, 469 (Fla. 1989) (discussing the contents of the policy manual that made "no mention of opening closed containers"); see also Wells, 495 U.S. 5, 110 S. Ct. at 1635 (indicating "absent such a policy, the instant search was not sufficiently regulated").8 
 The State has the burden of proving that a warrantless search falls within a recognized exception. State v. Watts, 801 N.W.2d 845, 850 (Iowa 2011). What the State presented here fell substantially short of the level of proof required in Wells. Deputy Burdt's testimony was—if anything—less specific than the manual provision deemed unsatisfactory in Wells. See Wells, 539 So. 2d at 469 (noting the manual required "an [i]nventory of all articles in the vehicle . . . such as articles of clothing, equipment and tools" (second alteration in original)). Deputy Burdt's testimony established only that the inventory covered "the contents of the vehicle." This simply restates what an "inventory" is and neither states nor implies anything about closed containers. Moreover, the inventory was actually conducted by an officer belonging to a different law enforcement agency, and there was no evidence as to the policy he followed.
Thus, I would simply find the opening of the cloth bag as part of the inventory search of the vehicle violated the Fourth Amendment. See Tyler v. State, 185 So. 3d 659, 661, 663-64 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2016) (invalidating the search of a suitcase in a trunk during an inventory search where "the state provided no evidence of the department's inventory policy, other than the officer's testimony that one existed and that the contents of the impounded vehicle were required to be inventoried and logged for liability purposes"); Sams v. State, 71 N.E.3d 372, 375, 378-79, 383 (Ind. Ct. App. 2017) (overturning an inventory search of a fast-food bag and a hamburger box where the written policy was to "list all personal property" whereas the practice in the field was to look for anything "valuable," thus resulting in too much discretion); State v. Baker, 306 Kan. 585, 395 P.3d 422, 428 (Kan. 2017) ("The failure to present any evidence of standardized criteria or an established routine governing the opening of closed containers during inventory searches is fatal to the State's inevitable discovery claim."); People v. Mead, 320 Mich. App. 613, 908 N.W.2d 555, 563-64 (Mich. Ct. App. 2017) (noting the search of a backpack in a vehicle was not justified as an inventory search because the officer merely "testified that he searches vehicles to 'check for valuables or any damage to the vehicle, anything that may be in there'" but "offered no further explanation of police department policies, did not explain department policy for the search of a container, and did not explain how his search complied with department policy"); Commonwealth v. West, 2007 PA Super 349, 937 A.2d 516, 529 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2007) (determining an inventory search that uncovered cocaine in a motorcycle seat was invalid because "the suppression transcript simply [did] not contain testimony showing the department had in place and employed a standard, reasonable policy when searching the vehicle" and when "[t]he Commonwealth had the burden to demonstrate the particulars of that policy and to show the search was done in accordance therewith"); State v. Molder, 337 S.W.3d 403, 410 (Tex. Ct. App. 2011) (finding the search results should be suppressed where the state failed to introduce the actual inventory policy and "Trooper Gillum's concise testimony establishe[d] that [the department of public safety] ha[d] a general policy to inventory vehicles associated with defendants' arrests, but the testimony relate[d] nothing about the scope of the policy or how it affect[ed] closed containers such as appellee's roped blue bag"). I would end the opinion at this point.
 II. The Majority's Iowa Constitutional Analysis Is Flawed.
Instead of following the foregoing path, which seems to me not in the least difficult to follow, the majority decides to "stake  out higher constitutional ground" and "restore the balance between citizens and law enforcement." As it is the end of our term, I will not debate these broader themes with the majority. But I will explain where I disagree with the substance of the majority's ruling.
First, I do not believe the majority's ruling will promote "stability and finality in law." Instead, it will create uncertainty and unneeded burdens.
Take Deputy Burdt's decision to impound the vehicle. I thought that was an easy call in this case. The vehicle had no valid registration and could not be legally driven. Nor could it be left where it was on the side of the highway. However, the majority now requires that "the owner or driver . . . have the ability to opt for alternatives other than police impoundment that do not interfere with public safety." So the first thing law enforcement must do is develop a list of options and provide it to the motorist. What options? For example, must the motorist be offered the chance to arrange his or her own tow? Does law enforcement need to wait around while this is happening? Suppose the motorist says, "I don't know what to do about the vehicle. You should check with the owner." What if the motorist is being arrested? What if law enforcement wants to impound the vehicle and consult with the county attorney's office on whether a warrant is appropriate? What if no driver is present?
Next, the contents of the vehicle. The majority says the driver should have the opportunity to retrieve items from the vehicle. This means, of course, the officer must wait while items are retrieved. But again, what if the driver is being arrested or asks to check with the owner? Can the officer watch while items are being retrieved? If not, what about the officer's safety?
Regarding closed containers, the majority indicates not only that they may not be opened, but also that the motorist must be told they won't be opened "but stored for safekeeping as a unit unless the owner or operator directs otherwise." Does this mandatory disclaimer prevent law enforcement from getting a warrant?
Law enforcement needs clear rules, not elaborate, partly developed decision trees. We should not be converting roadside stops into episodes from Plato's Dialogues. Respectfully, I believe the Wells standard works better than the majority's approach.
Second, despite what the majority may suggest, its approach is not supported by constitutional precedents from other states. The majority directs us to precedents from Indiana, New Jersey, Oregon, South Dakota, Texas, and Washington.
In reality, three of those six states do not now limit closed container searches when conducted pursuant to a bona fide inventory search policy. The majority has this caselaw wrong.
The Indiana Court of Appeals in State v. Lucas did invalidate the search of a locked box under both the state and federal constitutions. 859 N.E.2d 1244, 1251 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007). However, this ruling was not based on a blanket prohibition against opening closed containers but instead on the fact that the inventory policy was silent on the issue of locked boxes. Id. at 1250-51. In George v. State, the court concluded that a search of the contents of a pill bottle found in a lidless condom box was permissible. 901 N.E.2d 590, 592, 597 (Ind. Ct. App. 2009).
Also, South Dakota has backed down from its earlier views on inventory searches. Under the South Dakota Constitution, "so long as there is a good faith, non-investigatory inventory search conducted pursuant to reasonable, standardized  and uniform policies, it need not be restricted to articles which are within the plain view of the officers' vision." State v. Flittie, 425 N.W.2d 1, 5-6 (S.D. 1988); see also State v. Hejhal, 438 N.W.2d 820, 821-22 (S.D. 1989) (holding the inventory search of the wallet was conducted according to "reasonable[,] standardized[,] and uniform policies").
In Autran v. State, a plurality of the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals found that the inventory search of the contents of a vehicle's trunk—including a box containing large sums of money and drug residue—violated the Texas Constitution but not the Fourth Amendment. 887 S.W.2d 31, 33, 36, 42 (Tex. Crim. App. 1994) (en banc) (plurality opinion). The plurality noted its decision was "not to say that officers may never search a closed or locked container, only that the officers may not rely upon the inventory exception to conduct such a warrantless search." Id. at 42.
Only two years later, though, another Texas appellate court "decline[d] . . . to follow the plurality opinion in Autran because [it did] not believe that Autran constitutes either binding precedent or sound law." Hatcher v. State, 916 S.W.2d 643, 645 (Tex. Ct. App. 1996). The court thus concluded that the state constitution does not afford greater rights than the Fourth Amendment in this area and therefore determined that the inventory search of the defendant's closed container—in this instance, her purse—did not violate her constitutional rights. Id. at 644, 646; see also Hankston v. State, 517 S.W.3d 112, 120 (Tex. Crim. App. 2017) (rejecting the reasoning of the Autran plurality and instead finding the court was "free to adopt the Supreme Court's interpretation of the Fourth Amendment, and apply it in this case, simply because it 'makes more sense'" (quoting Crittenden v. State, 899 S.W.2d 668, 673 (Tex. Crim. App. 1995) (en banc))).
Two other states cited by the majority appear not to forbid all opening of closed containers but focus on the type of container. In State v. Hite, the Oregon Court of Appeals overturned an inventory search of a backpack, not because of a strict rule against searches of closed containers, but because the backpack was "not designed to contain or objectively likely to contain valuables or even dangerous items." 266 Ore. App. 710, 338 P.3d 803, 811 (Or. Ct. App. 2014). Later, in State v. Cleland, the same court upheld an inventory search of a black nylon case that appeared to be designed for holding small electronics. 289 Ore. App. 379, 410 P.3d 386, 387-88 (Or. Ct. App. 2017).
In State v. Wisdom, the Washington Court of Appeals found that the opening of a defendant's shaving kit under an inventory search was a violation of the defendant's state constitutional rights. 187 Wn. App. 652, 349 P.3d 953, 955, 965 (Wash. Ct. App. 2015). The court's focus, though, was on the nature of the container and not whether it was open or closed:
A person does not rummage through a woman's purse, because of secrets obtained therein. A man's shaving kit bag can be likened to a woman's purse. The kit bag could obtain prescription drugs, condoms, or other items the owner wishes shielded from the public. The bag is intended to safeguard the privacy of personal effects. Literature, medicines, and other things found inside a bag may reveal much about a person's activities, associations, and beliefs.
Id. at 961.
A cloth drawstring bag is the type of container that often does contain valuables, such as jewelry or money, but usually does not contain personal or health information. I am not persuaded that Oregon—or perhaps Washington—would forbid inventorying  the contents of such a bag pursuant to an otherwise valid inventory search policy.
This leaves New Jersey as the remaining jurisdiction discussed by the majority. New Jersey departs from federal precedent but uses a balancing test under the state constitution that considers "the scope of the search, the procedure used, and the availability of less intrusive alternatives." State v. Hummel, 232 N.J. 196, 179 A.3d 366, 373 (N.J. 2018) (quoting State v. Mangold, 82 N.J. 575, 414 A.2d 1312, 1317 (N.J. 1980)). Whatever the merits of this approach, it differs considerably from the approach taken by the majority today.
Nor can the majority find nourishment in pre-Wells Iowa caselaw. State v. Roth upheld the inventory search that included the opening and examination of the contents of a bag. 305 N.W.2d 501, 507-08 (Iowa 1981). In State v. Kuster, our court struck down the impoundment of a vehicle that had been locked and legally parked. 353 N.W.2d 428, 432 (Iowa 1984), overruled by Huisman, 544 N.W.2d at 440. Here, however, the vehicle was not legally parked and could not have been legally driven.
Inventory searches are subject to abuse. Thus, it is important to limit law enforcement discretion in this area. Everyone agrees on this point. The relevant question, though, is how to limit that discretion. I think Wells is a sounder approach than the majority's. It allows law enforcement to develop the policy, so long as it an actual policy, rather than having nonexpert judges develop the policy. I've already discussed what I believe to be the practical flaws in the majority's approach.
Overall, I think the majority understates the legitimate need for inventory searches, understates the willingness of defendants to make false claims of missing property, and understates the potential risk to law enforcement of transforming vehicle impoundments into lengthy, interactive Q-and-A sessions.
 III. Conclusion.
I would reverse the denial of Ingram's motion to suppress without embarking on a novel interpretation of article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution.9 
Waterman and Zager, JJ., join this special concurrence.

 

