).
I respectfully dissent.
This case involves the following criminal statute:
A person who goes armed with, carries, or transports a firearm of any kind, whether concealed or not, on the grounds of a school commits a class "D" felony. For the purposes of this section, "school" means a public or nonpublic school as defined in section 280.2.
Iowa Code § 724.4B(1) (2018). The question here is what does "grounds of a school" mean? I think it means "a school plus contiguous real property." The majority concedes that this is at least a reasonable interpretation of the statute. I think it's the correct one here.
My view finds support in Webster's Dictionary. One definition of "grounds" is "the gardens, lawn, and planted areas immediately surrounding and belonging to a house or other building." Grounds, Webster's Third New International Dictionary (unabr. ed. 2002). Another definition is "an area appropriated to or used for a particular purpose." Id. The majority cites both definitions, but I think the first definition—which focuses on geography—is more apt than the second definition—which focuses on purpose. We are interpreting the phrase, "grounds of a school." Normally, one would not use the preposition "of" to denote the purpose of something. So the geographic emphasis rings more true to me.
South Carolina makes it a separate offense to engage in drug trafficking "in, on, or within a one-half mile radius of the grounds of a public or private elementary, middle, or secondary school." State v. Green, 350 S.C. 580, 567 S.E.2d 505, 509 (S.C.  Ct. App. 2002) (quoting S.C. Code Ann. § 44-53-445(A) (2002)). In Green, the South Carolina Court of Appeals upheld a conviction after construing the statute as follows:
Section 44-53-445 clearly and unambiguously prohibits distribution of a controlled substance within a one-half mile radius of school grounds. The term "grounds," in common and ordinary usage, means the "land surrounding or attached to a house or other building." Webster's New World College Dictionary 627 (4th ed. 1999). We therefore find the term as used in § 44-53-445(A) includes all school-owned property contiguous to or surrounding the school's physical plant.
Id.
There is a further point to be made. Criminal statutes ought to give fair notice to the public of the conduct that is prohibited; we enforce that concept through the rule of lenity. See State v. Lindell, 828 N.W.2d 1, 13 (Iowa 2013). There is good reason to believe that this statute did not give fair notice. For one thing, the defendant himself believed his conduct was lawful. When asked, "Do you have a firearm on you?" the defendant replied, "Yes, but I have a permit." He then showed the police officer his permit. More importantly, the police officer was unsure. It should be noted that this officer was a twenty-three-year veteran of the Davenport Police Department. He was working off-duty for the school district that night, something he had done for more than the last ten years. And yet—despite all that experience—he did not know whether the defendant's possession of a firearm in that location was illegal. The officer testified,
Q. Now, in my reading of this case, and correct me if I'm wrong, I think charges weren't filed until a couple weeks after this event took place. Can you kind of walk us through that process. A. Yes. So when I was dealing with him there, I made the determination based on where we were and people coming and going as a risk factor for me out there, for him, for those coming and going, that I was just going to get him on his way. I wanted to make sure that since the applicable law said "school," that Brady Street Stadium applied, so I felt that I needed to make sure that I was confident in the applicable law before I took him into custody if that was the case. So I allowed him to go. And then after that, I met with the County Attorney's Office in the weeks after, spoke with them about the case that I had, presented what I had seen and what I had done up there, and then that's when the charges were filed thereafter.
We have invoked the rule of lenity numerous times in our recent decisions. See, e.g., In re Prop. Seized from Bo Li, 911 N.W.2d 423, 429 (Iowa 2018) ("The State's statutory interpretation . . . would violate 'the rule of lenity, which guides us to resolve ambiguous criminal statutes in favor of the accused.'" (quoting State v. Hagen, 840 N.W.2d 140, 146 (Iowa 2013))); State v. Nall, 894 N.W.2d 514, 519 (Iowa 2017) ("[U]nder the rule of lenity, we take a narrow approach to construing ambiguous criminal laws."); State v. Hoyman, 863 N.W.2d 1, 18 (Iowa 2015) ("[T]he principle that we construe criminal statutes narrowly, otherwise known as the rule of lenity, should be taken into account.").
In my view, this is a case where "reasonable doubt persists after the traditional canons of interpretation have been considered." Antonin Scalia & Bryan A. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts 197 (2012) [hereinafter Scalia & Garner]. Accordingly, I would apply the rule of lenity here. It favors a narrow construction of the term, "grounds of a school," as  referring only to a school and its surrounding real estate. Cf. State v. Shelley, 205 N.J. 320, 15 A.3d 818, 819, 823-24 (N.J. 2011) (vacating the defendant's conviction for distributing cocaine within a school zone after holding that a daycare center with one full-day kindergarten program staffed by a state-certified teacher did not constitute an "elementary school").
Concerning the majority's reasoning, I have the following observations. First, the majority says, "When interpreting a statute, we seek to ascertain the legislature's intent"—quoting State v. Lopez, 907 N.W.2d 112, 116 (Iowa 2018). I agree Lopez and other cases say that. But they're wrong. Statutory interpretation is not a quest for legislative intent. See Scalia & Garner at 29-30, 391-96 (discussing "[t]he false notion that the purpose of interpretation is to discover intent"). Legislative purpose may be relevant in interpreting ambiguous language, see Iowa Code § 4.6(1), but it is merely part of the journey, not a destination. To be fair to defendants, and fair to the legislature itself, we cannot let our perceptions of legislative intent override statutory text.
Second, the majority places considerable weight on a textual difference between Iowa Code section 724.4A(1) and Iowa Code section 724.4B(1). Section 724.4A, which was passed in 1994, doubled the fines for certain offenses committed in a "weapons free zone," which was defined as "the area in or on, or within one thousand feet of, the real property comprising a public or private elementary or secondary school, or in or on the real property comprising a public park." See id. § 724.4A(1)—(2). Section 724.4B(1) was adopted the following year and, as noted, made possession of a firearm "on the grounds of a school" a class "D" felony. See id. § 724.4B(1). In the majority's view, the difference in wording between section 724.4A(1) and section 724.4B(1) shows the legislature intended "grounds of a school" to mean something other than "the real property comprising a public or private elementary or secondary school."
I think the majority reads too much into too little. The general assembly's passage of Iowa Code section 724.4B responded to just-enacted federal legislation that threatened loss of federal funding for states that did not have zero-tolerance laws for students bringing weapons to school. See Gun-Free Schools Act of 1994, Pub. L. No. 103-227, § 1032, 108 Stat. 125, 270-71 (now codified as amended at 20 U.S.C. § 7961 (2018)). Our legislature was under immediate pressure to put a firearms ban in schools in the books. I seriously doubt the general assembly closely studied section 724.4A beforehand and intentionally chose different language in order to convey a different meaning.
I pause to add a few words on the special concurrence. The special concurrence takes the position that a stadium is a school itself. In my view, this bolsters my dissent. If my distinguished colleagues cannot agree on the meaning of "grounds of a school," how is a citizen who wants to comply with the law supposed to know what the term means? The special concurrence also makes much of the prominent notice indicating that the stadium is property of the Davenport School District. The notice, however, refers to the site as an "athletic complex"—i.e., not a school. And notwithstanding this supposedly clear notice, a law enforcement officer who had worked this site for the past decade was uncertain himself whether firearms were forbidden.
For all these reasons, I remain unconvinced that "grounds of a school" as used in this criminal statute includes the parking lot of a football stadium separated by over a mile from the school itself. I would  therefore reverse the defendant's conviction on the basis of insufficient evidence.

 

