).10  But, I agree with  Justice Zager's conclusion that the search of Short's residence can be upheld under those decisions. And, I join in Justice Mansfield's separate dissent in this case, which addresses the majority's ten "established principles of independent state constitutional law."
The majority neglects to mention that Short had a lengthy criminal record, including multiple felony convictions. He had served time in prison for robbery. On March 31, 2011, he pled guilty to his fourth theft-related offense and, in lieu of incarceration, received a generous sentence of probation on the condition that his residence could be searched without a warrant any time a law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe contraband was present. Consent-to-search clauses have commonly been used in parole and probation agreements to deter misconduct and facilitate detection of wrongdoing. Less than two months later, while still on probation, Short committed the crime at issue in this case by burglarizing a home, taking two flat-screen televisions, jewelry, and a $100 gift card to Minerva's Restaurant. He used the gift card there and signed the reciept. The waitress and manager later identified Short from a photograph. A magistrate found probable cause to search his residence and issued a search warrant, which all parties acknowledge was invalid due to an out-of-date address. The deputies, based on inaccurate advice during a phone call with the magistrate, wrote in the new address, executed the amended warrant, and found the stolen property at Short's residence. The district court, following Knights, correctly upheld the search based on Short's probation agreement and diminished expectations of privacy as a felon under supervision. I disagree with the majority's conclusion that Short has the same expectations of privacy as ordinary Iowans. It is unfortunate the majority, as it did in Baldon, has again failed to enforce an offender's consent-to-search provision, depriving our state's corrections program of an important tool to encourage parolees and probationers to obey the law.
As in several other recent decisions erroneously decided by this majority, "[t]he validity of this consent search is solidly grounded on Fourth Amendment search and seizure caselaw, and there is no good reason to hold otherwise under article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution." State v. Pals, 805 N.W.2d 767, 784 (Iowa 2011) (Waterman, J., dissenting). Today's majority, as in Pals, Baldon, and Ochoa, once again uses the Iowa Constitution to evade well-settled Fourth Amendment precedent without setting forth any principled basis for construing Iowa's nearly identically worded search and seizure provision to require greater restrictions on the law enforcement community and elected branches. The majority fails to articulate any standards for interpreting the same constitutional protections differently under federal and state law. The majority is willing to reach a different result based simply on its own conclusion that particular decisions of the United States Supreme Court are not "persuasive." Persuasion is in the eye of the beholder. More restraint is warranted when interpreting our state constitution, which by design is so difficult for the people to amend.11 
 To reach its result, the majority takes an inconsistent approach to error preservation 12  and rests its analysis on a false premise—that State v. Cullison, a parolee-search case, was decided four decades ago under the search and seizure provision in article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution. 173 N.W.2d 533, 534-35 (Iowa 1970). That provision is mentioned nowhere within the four corners of the majority or dissenting opinions in that case. Rather, as further explained in Justice Zager's dissent today, Cullison was decided under the Fourth Amendment and is no longer good law after Knights. Pull on the loose thread of Cullison, and the majority's analysis unravels.13 
References to "the sanctity of the home" do not justify the majority's departure from settled Fourth Amendment precedent.14  Cf. Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 841 (Mansfield, J., dissenting) ("If the 'sanctity of the home' trumps an offender's status, as we held in Ochoa, why has this court repeatedly upheld sex offender residency restrictions?"). The home has sanctity in all fifty states. This case is not an example of state courts of last resort acting as  laboratories developing constitutional doctrine in unsettled areas, such as same-sex marriage, before the issue is squarely decided by the Supreme Court. Rather, our court today departs from a unanimous decision of that Court, Knights, 534 U.S. at 122, 122 S. Ct. at 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 507, that is widely followed by our sister states under their state constitutions.15  The majority cites no decision of any other state supreme court declining to follow Knights under its state constitution. Nor does the majority marshal any academic criticism of Knights.
The majority's departure from settled Fourth Amendment caselaw inevitably leads to unpredictability, confusion, and instability in the law, with multiple sets of rules applying to the same conduct. In my view, we should return to our traditional practice of interpreting article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution to have the same meaning as the Fourth Amendment, as the framers of our state constitution intended. See Pals, 805 N.W.2d at 786-87 (Waterman, J., dissenting). And, we should return to our long-standing tradition of following the decisions of the highest court in the land when, as here, no departure is warranted by any difference in the text, structure, or history of the Iowa provision.
I dissent to fire another warning shot across the bow of the ship the majority steers in the wrong direction without a navigation system.
 I. We Should Construe Article I, Section 8 of the Iowa Constitution to Have the Same Meaning as the Fourth Amendment.
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution 16  and article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution 17   are worded virtually identically and provide the same protection against unreasonable searches and seizures. Compare U.S. Const. Amend. IV, with Iowa Cosnt. art. I, § 8. Our court, like most state supreme courts, has traditionally followed federal precedent in construing the same language in the state constitution. See Robert F. Williams, The Law of American State Constitutions, 194-95 (2009) (noting a "clear majority" of cases "decide to follow, rather than diverge from, federal constitutional doctrine"). Decisions of the United States Supreme Court resolve issues that are briefed and argued by the best lawyers in the country, after those issues have first been thoroughly vetted in the federal courts of appeals. Our nation's Supreme Court decisions are binding on all federal and state courts applying the Fourth Amendment and, unless plainly erroneous, should be followed to interpret nearly identical language in the state constitution. The Illinois Supreme Court reaffirmed its adherence to federal cases to interpret its state's constitution, stating:
This limited lockstep approach is not a surrender of state sovereignty or an abandonment of the judicial function. It is, instead, based on the premise that the drafters of the [state] constitution and the delegates to the constitutional convention intended the phrase "search and seizure" in the state document to mean, in general, what the same phrase means in the federal constitution.
People v. Caballes, 221 Ill. 2d 282, 851 N.E.2d 26, 45, 303 Ill. Dec. 128 (Ill. 2006). This is equally true in Iowa.
The timing of the adoption of the Iowa Constitution 18  and the use of nearly identical wording confirm the framers intended article I, section 8 to duplicate the same constitutional protection against unreasonable searches and seizures found in the Fourth Amendment. Pals, 805 N.W.2d at 786 (Waterman, J., dissenting) (noting "article I, section 8 was the Fourth Amendment 'reenacted' in Iowa to apply to the state" (quoting State v. Nelson, 231 Iowa 177, 185, 300 N.W. 685, 689 (1941) (Mitchell, J., dissenting))); see also People v. Pickens, 446 Mich. 298, 521 N.W.2d 797, 806 (Mich. 1994) (commenting "[i]f the convention or ratifiers had intended to alter the meaning of this provision, we can presume they would have done so by express words" (internal quotation marks omitted)). Other state supreme courts have reached the same conclusion.19 
 Today's majority cites no historical evidence that Iowa's founders intended the Iowa search and seizure provision to impose greater restrictions on law enforcement. It is, therefore, no surprise that our state's search and seizure caselaw has long tracked with Fourth Amendment caselaw because we have consistently construed article I, section 8 to have the same meaning. See, e.g., State v. Breuer, 577 N.W.2d 41, 44 (Iowa 1998) (" '[T]he language of those clauses is substantially identical and we have consistently interpreted the scope and purpose of article I, section 8, of the Iowa Constitution to track with federal interpretations of the Fourth Amendment.' " (quoting State v. Showalter, 427 N.W.2d 166, 168 (Iowa 1988))).20 
 Only recently has our court diverged from this precedent. This court first overtly diverged from the modern-day search and seizure decisions of the United States Supreme Court in State v. Cline, 617 N.W.2d 277, 293 (Iowa 2000), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Turner, 630 N.W.2d 601, 606 n.2 (Iowa 2001). The Cline court stated, "[W]e strive to be consistent with federal constitutional law in our interpretation of the Iowa Constitution, but we 'jealously guard our right and duty to differ in appropriate cases.' " 617 N.W.2d at 285 (quoting State v. Olsen, 293 N.W.2d 216, 220 (Iowa 1980)). Cline held the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule recognized by the United States Supreme Court did not exist under the Iowa Constitution. Id. at 293. Cline, however, rejected a federal exception to a judge-made remedy for constitutional violations; Cline did not impose greater restrictions on the power of police to conduct warrantless searches. See Davis v. United States, 564 U.S.    ,    , 131 S. Ct. 2419, 2426, 180 L. Ed. 2d 285, 293 (2011) (noting exclusion of evidence "is not a personal constitutional right," but rather is a court-created prudential remedy (internal quotation marks omitted)).21 
Our court's next retreat from Fourth Amendment precedent was State v. Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d 260, 287-91 (Iowa 2010). The Ochoa court held that a warrantless search of a parolee's motel room violated the search and seizure provision of the Iowa Constitution, even though it was permitted under the Fourth Amendment based on United States Supreme Court precedent. Id. at 291. The Ochoa court proclaimed:
In order to resolve any inconsistency in our prior cases, we now hold that, while United States Supreme Court cases are entitled to respectful consideration, we will engage in independent analysis of the content of our state search and seizure provisions. A Fourth Amendment opinion of the United States Supreme Court, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, or any other federal court is no more binding upon our interpretation of article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution than is a case decided by another state supreme court under a search and seizure provision of that state's constitution. The degree to which we follow United States Supreme Court precedent, or any other precedent, depends solely upon its ability to persuade us with the reasoning of the decision.
Id. at 267 (emphasis added). The Ochoa court's chest-thumping assertion of judicial power marked a dramatic departure from our court's long-standing adherence to settled Fourth Amendment precedent on the validity of searches. This new mindset metastasized into Pals,22  Baldon, and today's decision.23 
 Contrary to Ochoa, I consider a United States Supreme Court decision on the Fourth Amendment to be of significantly greater precedential weight than a decision by another state supreme court. Why? Because, to restate the obvious, the United States Supreme Court's holdings are binding on all state and federal courts applying the Fourth Amendment, and our state constitution's search and seizure provision has the same meaning as the federal provision.
It is indeed our court's role to interpret the Iowa Constitution, but I part company with the majority's stated willingness to impose greater restrictions on police and our legislature under the Iowa Constitution's search and seizure provision merely by deeming the Supreme Court's Fourth Amendment precedent unpersuasive.
A bare disagreement with the United States Supreme Court's interpretation of the Federal Constitution "imparts no sound doctrinal basis to impose a contrary view under the pretext of separately interpreting our State Constitution. Our Constitution is more than just a device to reject or evade federal decisions . . . ."
State v. Kottman, 2005 SD 116, 707 N.W.2d 114, 119-20 (S.D. 2005) (quoting State v. Schwartz, 2004 SD 123, 689 N.W.2d 430, 438 (S.D. 2004) (Konenkamp, J., concurring in judgment)).
The majority, citing two law professors, perjoratively labels our court's long-standing practice of following Fourth Amemdment precedent to be an "aggressive maximalist" approach and a "precommitment device preventing independent examination of the facts and law." No court until now has used those labels to describe the approach followed by most state supreme courts. I doubt any of the justices of our court who retired before Ochoa, including jurists such as C. Edwin Moore, Clay LeGrand, or Harvey Uhlenhopp, would have agreed those labels accurately describe their approach to search and seizure law. Stare decisis is a "precommitment device," is it not?24  By contrast, the majority expressly disavows following any specific standards or criteria for determining when to depart from settled Fourth Amendment  precedent. What label best describes the majority's approach today?
The majority's recent departures from our court's numerous decisions following settled federal constitutional precedent undermine the predictability and stability of our law. Revisiting settled precedent whenever four justices of this court find prior cases "unpersuasive" leads to serious and troubling repercussions. Too many long-settled rules are put back into play. This subverts the goals served by the doctrine of stare decisis. A recent admonition by the Supreme Court is worth repeating.
[T]his Court does not overturn its precedents lightly. Stare decisis, we have stated, "is the preferred course because it promotes the evenhanded, predictable, and consistent development of legal principles, fosters reliance on judicial decisions, and contributes to the actual and perceived integrity of the judicial process." Although "not an inexorable command," stare decisis is a foundation stone of the rule of law, necessary to ensure that legal rules develop "in a principled and intelligible fashion." For that reason, this Court has always held that "any departure" from the doctrine "demands special justification."
Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian Cmty., ___ U.S. ___, ___, 134 S. Ct. 2024, 2036, 188 L. Ed. 2d 1071, 1088 (2014) (citations omitted); see also State v. Walker, 804 N.W.2d 284, 296 (Iowa 2011) ("Stare decisis is a valuable legal doctrine which lends stability to the law . . . ." (Internal quotation marks omitted.)); Kiesau v. Bantz, 686 N.W.2d 164, 180 (Iowa 2004) (Cady, J., dissenting) ("It nearly goes without saying that the doctrine of stare decisis is one of the bedrock principles on which this court is built. It is an important restraint on judicial authority and provides needed stability in and respect for the law."); cf. State v. Brown, 356 Ark. 460, 156 S.W.3d 722, 735-36 (Ark. 2004) (Glaze, J., dissenting) (concluding majority violated Arkansas precedent by giving state search and seizure provision different meaning than Fourth Amendment).
The majority injects further instability into our law through its mantra that our court "reserve[s] the right to apply the standard in a different fashion." I am not sure what that means. Does this approach make predicting the law a guessing game?
The legitimacy of our court's decisions rests in part on the perception and reality that we are applying the rule of law, not our personal preferences for what the law should be. As Justice Frankfurter admonished, we are not "justified in writing [our] private notions of policy into the Constitution, no matter how deeply [we] may cherish them or how mischievous [we] may deem their disregard." W. Va. State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624, 647, 63 S. Ct. 1178, 1189, 87 L. Ed. 1628, 1642 (1943) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting). We are on solid ground interpreting our state constitution consistently with United States Supreme Court decisions construing the parallel provision in the Federal Constitution. We are on shaky ground when we take a different path simply because we find the federal interpretations "unpersuasive."
"If these principles of constitutional construction were to be ignored critics not unreasonably would declare it judicial arrogance for courts to say that their power to construe constitutions was limited only by the restraints courts might impose upon themselves. Courts are not legislatures, and neither are they constitutional framers and adopters of constitutions. What Justice Powell said in another context is not without relevance: 'We should be ever mindful of the contradictions that would arise if a democracy were to permit general oversight of the elected branches of government by a nonrepresentative, and in large measure insulated, judicial branch.' "
Caballes, 851 N.E.2d at 36 (quoting People v. Tisler, 103 Ill. 2d 226, 469 N.E.2d 147, 161, 82 Ill. Dec. 613 (Ill. 1984) (Ward, J., concurring)). Returning to our traditional approach will restore legitimacy to our constitutional adjudication in this area.
The majority, by diverging from settled federal precedent, contributes to a Tower of Babel-like cacophony of varying state court interpretations of nearly identically worded search and seizure provisions. Our court is now part of the problem, not the solution. As one commentator observed, "state constitutional law today is a vast wasteland of confusing, conflicting, and essentially unintelligible pronouncements." James A. Gardner, The Failed Discourse of State Constitutionalism, 90 Mich. L. Rev. 761, 763 (1992) [hereinafter Gardner]. Adherence to well-settled Fourth Amendment precedent promotes uniformity between state and federal search and seizure law. Our sister states have recognized the importance of uniformity in state and federal interpretations of the same constitutional language.25  Diverging from settled federal precedent results in two sets of rules and confusion among the bench and bar and law enforcement over which rules to follow. It also leads to inconsistent results, whereby evidence from the same arrest or crime could be admissible in federal court, but not state court. See Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 842 (Mansfield, J., dissenting) ("[W]e now have two different sets of search and seizure rules in Iowa.").
The Iowa bench and bar and the law enforcement community are whipsawed by our court's end runs around well-settled Iowa and Federal Fourth Amendment precedent. Federal Fourth Amendment law has been comparatively stable. See Davis, 564 U.S. at ___, 131 S. Ct. at 2433, 180 L. Ed. 2d at 301 ("Decisions overruling this Court's Fourth Amendment precedents are rare.").26  The Iowa bench and  bar should be able to rely on settled federal precedent directly on point in construing the parallel provisions of the Iowa Constitution. Will Iowa criminal defense attorneys now feel compelled to argue divergence from Fourth Amendment precedent on any issue to avoid a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, malpractice, or disciplinary charges for neglect or incompetence—even if the position taken is contrary to long-settled caselaw—merely because a majority of our court might find the precedent unpersuasive? See Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 816 (Appel, J., concurring specially) (citing cases finding defense counsel ineffective or guilty of "malpractice" for failing to argue state constitutional claims). Must Iowa lawyers do a fifty-state survey and review of the academic literature in every case to brief why we should reject a decision of the highest court in the land? Or, why bother if a majority of our court can disregard any precedent?
 II. We Should Articulate Standards for Departing from Settled Federal Precedent When Construing the Same Provisions in the Iowa Constitution.
We, of course, have the interpretive power under our state constitution to depart from federal precedent. Just because we can depart does not mean we should. I disagree with the majority's assertion that our court should not establish "criteria" for determining when to diverge from federal interpretations. In my view, our departures should be based on articulated standards that mean something more than a salute to Iowa "values" or a bald conclusion the federal precedent is "unpersuasive." See Schwartz, 689 N.W.2d at 444 (recognizing that the "values" rationale "has a high potential for misuse"); Gardner, 90 Mich. L. Rev. at 818 ("[T]he notion of significant local variations in character and identity is just too implausible to take seriously as the basis for a distinct constitutional discourse.").
The battle lines for this debate are drawn in the divided decision of the South Dakota Supreme Court in Schwartz. See generally 689 N.W.2d at 437-45; id. at 445-49 (Sabers, J., dissenting). In Schwartz, defendants were convicted of methamphetamine possession based on evidence obtained in a warrantless search of their curbside trash. Id. at 433. The defendants argued the South Dakota Constitution prohibited the warrantless search and seizure of their trash. Id. at 432. As in Iowa, the search and seizure provision of the South Dakota Constitution was worded nearly identically to the Fourth Amendment. See id. at 435 n.1.
The United States Supreme Court squarely addressed the question of the applicability of Fourth Amendment protections to curbside trash in California v. Greenwood, 486 U.S. 35, 108 S. Ct. 1625, 100 L. Ed. 2d 30 (1988). Greenwood held that persons who place their garbage for public collection do not have a reasonable expectation of privacy over its contents. Greenwood, 486 U.S. at 40-41, 108 S. Ct. at 1629, 100 L. Ed. 2d at 36-37. The Schwartz defendants argued the South Dakota Constitution should be construed to provide broader protection. 689 N.W.2d 435. The Schwartz plurality noted a majority of state courts follow Greenwood and applied essentially the same test as Greenwood to reach the same result under the South Dakota Constitution. Id. The Schwartz plurality observed, "Those jurisdictions  who have decided to part company with the Greenwood decision have generally relied upon unique language in their state constitution to extend protection to trash intended for collection." Id. Two dissenting justices found Greenwood unpersuasive and advocated for greater protection under the South Dakota Constitution. Id. at 446 (Sabers, J., dissenting).
Two concurring opinions called for the type of analysis lacking in today's majority opinion and in Baldon, Pals, and Ochoa. See Schwartz, 689 N.W.2d at 437 (Zinter, J., concurring); id. at 437-45 (Konenkamp, J., concurring in judgment). Justice Zinter admonished counsel in future cases "to present some interpretive methodology that leads to principled constitutional interpretation when they assert that essentially identical language in our Constitution means something different than the United States Constitution." Id. at 437 (Zinter, J., concurring). A concurring opinion by Justice Konenkamp elaborated, stating: "Whether we can more broadly interpret our similarly worded state constitutional provisions should be decided on a neutral set of divergence standards." Id. at 438 (Konenkamp, J., concurring in result). This concurrence warned that "[w]idely divergent interpretations of similar provisions create unpredictability and confusion in the law." Id. at 439. His concurrence went on to propose:
In deciding whether a state constitutional provision should receive a divergent interpretation, we should examine (1) the text of the provision at issue; (2) the territorial, legal, and constitutional history surrounding the provision; (3) the structural differences in the State and Federal Constitutions; and (4) the matters of unique state tradition or concern that bear on the meaning of the provision.
Id. at 440.27  Justice Konenkamp, after discussing these "divergence standards," joined the majority opinion following Greenwood. Id. 441-44.
Justice Konenkamp's thorough analysis provides a useful roadmap for determining whether an independent state constitutional adjudication should lead to a different result than federal precedent. "Constitutional analysis always begins with the text." Id. at 441. His concurrence noted, when the South Dakota Constitution was adopted in 1889, "the Federal Bill of Rights had no binding effect on state courts," suggesting that "the adoption of many of the provisions [in the] State Bill of Rights . . . may have reflected an intention primarily to duplicate corresponding federal provisions." Id. He observed that a difference in wording would provide the best argument for a difference in interpretation. Id. Faced with a "substantively identical" provision, he concluded that  "[n]othing in the language itself indicates that the framers intended the state prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures to be broader than the federal prohibition in the Fourth Amendment." Id. at 442. He ended with an appropriate cautionary admonition regarding independent state constitutional adjudication:
In summary, to ensure that our constitutional jurisprudence develops in a methodical and authentic way, we must be guided by a set of interpretive principles. Authoritative and neutral analysis of South Dakota's Constitution cannot advance from episodic and reactionary borrowing of results from other state courts. Litigants must demonstrate that the text, history, or purpose of a South Dakota constitutional provision supports a different interpretation from the corresponding federal provision. If there is any place where the principle of judicial restraint ought to deter us, it is in the area of constitutional divergence. As Professors Whitebread and Slobogin warn, "wide-open state [court] activism runs counter to judicial decisionmaking goals of clarity, efficiency, and principled reasoning. . . . [Such activism] is bad policy because it promotes uncertainty, questionable duplication of review, and result-oriented jurisprudence." These words offer valid cautions, but, in the right case, they should not discourage us from a vigorous analysis of South Dakota's Constitution.
Id. at 445 (emphasis added) (citation omitted). The foregoing admonition applies with equal force here.
Our court likewise should not depart from well-settled federal precedent without good reason. Justice Konenkamp's "neutral set of divergence standards" provides guidance to those who would advocate construing an Iowa constitutional provision differently than its federal counterpart. Such standards are missing in the majority's analysis today and in Ochoa, Pals, and Baldon. Those standards warrant no departure from Knights and its Fourth Amendment progeny in this case.
 II. Conclusion.
For generations, in countless other decisions, our court has construed the search and seizure provision in the Iowa Bill of Rights to be of the same purpose, scope, and effect as the Fourth Amendment. It is this long-standing tradition of adherence to settled federal precedent from which our court has diverged, sporadically, since Ochoa was decided in December 2010. We do our job best as a state supreme court by applying our own pre-Ochoa jurisprudence, which holds article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution has the same meaning as the Fourth Amendment. We should return to relying on well-settled federal precedent on search and seizure issues.
For these reasons, and the reasons set forth in the dissents of Justices Mansfield and Zager, I would affirm the decision of the court of appeals and judgment of the district court upholding the search of Short's residence.
Mansfield, J., joins this dissent.
MANSFIELD, Justice (dissenting).
I join in the dissents of Justice Waterman and Justice Zager, but write separately to respond to the majority's ten "[e]stablished [p]rinciples of [i]ndependent [s]tate [c]onstitutional [l]aw." As I will attempt to show, these are not established principles. I will respond to the majority's ten points in order.
1. The majority begins its list of ten principles by asserting that its constitutional approach announced in 2010 has been "thoroughly explored" in a majority  opinion released in 2011 and a special concurrence released in 2013. See State v. Baldon, 829 N.W.2d 785, 803 (Iowa 2013) (Appel, J., concurring specially); State v. Pals, 805 N.W.2d 767 (Iowa 2011); State v. Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d 260 (Iowa 2010). That should end the debate, the majority suggests, notwithstanding the clear disconnect between this court's 2010-2014 approach to search and seizure and the approach it took for decades before 2010.
I respectfully disagree. Actual decisions are binding and can have stare decisis effect, but is a philosophical approach binding? Is a statement by the Iowa Supreme Court in one case that it gives no weight to United States Supreme Court interpretations of the same constitutional language binding for all future cases? I think not. Could four Justices of the Supreme Court bind this court in the future to follow "original intent," "legal realism," or "economic analysis of the law"? I doubt it.
Furthermore, the State of Iowa has directly put at issue the approach to be taken in this state constitutional search and seizure case. While the State is not seeking to overturn the Ochoa, Pals, or Baldon decisions today, it has asked this court to give deference to United States Supreme Court precedent. In particular, the State asks this court to follow United States v. Knights, 534 U.S. 112, 122, 122 S. Ct. 587, 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d 497, 507 (2001), in which that Court unanimously upheld a probation search similar to the one here. The State concludes in its brief, "Short has failed to produce sufficient justification for this Court to swim upstream against the well-accepted decision in Knights."
Thus, we need to decide whether we give deference to Knights or not. I believe we should.
2. The majority's second principle is that state constitutions were "the original protectors of individual rights." Here, all the majority is really saying is that America had states before it had a national government. Of course that is true. But what is the relevance of that point when it comes to interpreting the Iowa Constitution of 1857?
Our state did not come before the United States. We became a state over fifty years after the Federal Bill of Rights was ratified. Our framers adopted article I, section 8, not because it resembled something in some other state's colonial era constitution, but because it was already the federal constitutional provision. So if timing and sources matter, we should be guided by interpretations of the Fourth Amendment.
3. Principle three is that there was a strong emphasis on individual rights in the Iowa Constitution. To support this contention, the majority cites us to the statements made by George Ells during the debates over the Iowa Constitution. We should look at Ells's actual words, not the majority's paraphrasing.
After offering an amendment that was adopted by the convention to include a counterpart to the Due Process Clause in the Iowa Constitution, Ells said:
I am one of that class of men who believe that that clause in the Constitution of the United States, has been violated by the Congress of this nation in such a manner that we would be justified at this time, either by legal enactment or by incorporating provisions into our constitution, in protecting ourselves from its operation. I regard the Fugitive Slave Law as unconstitutional, because it does not give to man the right to defend his life and liberty by "due process of law." In this opinion, I expect to be at variance with my friend from Lee, [Mr. Johnston,] and those who  act with him. Now, the committee who have offered the amendment to this second section, did so from a desire that the Bill of Rights in the Constitution of this State, should be as strong, in this respect, as the Constitution of the United States. We have seen, Mr. Chairman, that Constitution violated again and again by the dominant party in the land, which rides roughshod over the necks of freemen. In common with a large majority of the people of this State, I desire to see our constitution contain every guarantee for freedom that words can express. If the words "due process of law," shall in time be recognized by our judicial tribunals to mean what they really do mean, "that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property, without a legal proceeding based upon the principles of the common law, and the constitution of the United States—that every man, when his life or liberty are imperilled, shall have the right to be tried by a jury of his countrymen. Then, sir, that infamous Fugitive Slave Law will become a nullity, and the American people will trample its odious enactments in the dust.
1 The Debates of the Constitutional Convention of the State of Iowa 101-02 (W. Blair Lord rep., 1857) (emphasis added), available at http://www.statelibraryofiowa.org/services/collections/law-library/ia const/iaconstdebates.
Reading Ells's statement in its entirety, rather than the majority's shorthand version, he was clearly urging his colleagues to include a due process clause in the Iowa Constitution so that it would have the same degree of protections against a rampant majority as the United States Constitution provided. He was not proposing a due process clause so that Iowa's courts could go on future solo missions to find new interpretations of constitutional provisions with established meanings.28 
McClure v. Owen is another example of the majority's overenthusiastic reading of nineteenth-century sources. See 26 Iowa 243 (1868). The majority cites McClure as an early recognition that Iowa can "construe state constitutional provisions free from federal precedent." But McClure had nothing to do with the proposition we are discussing today. The constitutional provisions being interpreted in McClure were Iowa constitutional provisions with no counterpart in the United States Constitution. See id. at 244.
Thus, in McClure, the court noted the United States Supreme Court had refused to follow our court's most recent interpretation on a question of the authority of municipal corporations under the Iowa Constitution. Id. at 253 (citing Gelpcke v. City of Dubuque, 68 U.S. 175, 206, 17 L. Ed. 520, 524 (1863)). This involved Iowa-specific provisions with no parallel in the United States Constitution. See generally Gelpcke, 68 U.S. at 204, 17 L. Ed. at 525 (setting forth provisions of the Iowa Constitution).
Along the same lines, Iowans should justly be proud of several landmark decisions of our court, including Clark v. Board of Directors, 24 Iowa 266 (1868),  and Coger v. Northwestern Union Packet Co., 37 Iowa 145 (1873). This court did not decide Clark and Coger, however, by disregarding contemporaneous federal interpretations of counterpart provisions of the United States Constitution. In Clark, this court held a provision of the 1857 Iowa Constitution providing " 'for the education of all of the youths of the State through a system of common schools' " required a local school board to integrate its schools. 24 Iowa at 271 (quoting Iowa Const. art. IX, div. 1, § 12 (emphasis added)). The Clark court reached this conclusion without citing or discussing any federal precedent or the United States Constitution. See generally id. at 269-77. Nor is our court's decision in Coger an example of divergence from United States Supreme Court precedent in interpreting a parallel provision of the Iowa Constitution. Coger presciently held that a "woman of color" was entitled to equal accommodations under the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution without finding any broader rights under the Iowa Constitution. See 37 Iowa at 153, 155-57. These decisions are rightly hailed today, but they should not be cited as justification for what this court is doing now in search and seizure law.
Also somewhat extravagant, in my view, is the majority's claim that our framers' use of a semicolon rather than a comma in article I, section 8 indicates "the framers [of the Iowa Constitution] believed that there was a relationship between the reasonableness clause and the warrant clause." Let's review the federal and the Iowa provisions. First, the Fourth Amendment:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
U.S. Const. amend. IV.
Now article I, section 8:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable seizures and searches shall not be violated; and no warrant shall issue but on probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons and things to be seized.
Iowa Const. art. I, § 8.
I do not think one can use this inconsequential punctuation difference to justify a different interpretation of article I, section 8.
Notably, in Ochoa the court merely noted this difference. See 792 N.W.2d at 268-69. Now it elevates this difference into a statement of the 1857 framers' intent.
4. The majority's next principle is that the incorporation of federal constitutional guarantees against the states has led to "a tendency for the United States Supreme Court to dilute the substance of the rights." The Fourth Amendment, in the view of the majority, was watered down once it became incorporated against the states under the Fourteenth Amendment. The majority decries the United States Supreme Court having replaced clear requirements with "vague notions of reasonableness."
People can decide for themselves whether this court's recent article I, section 8 decisions have led to greater clarity and predictability. In my view, a rule that would sustain searches based on reasonable suspicion of probationers who consented to such searches as a condition of probation is straightforward and easy to  apply. It was sustained unanimously by the United States Supreme Court in Knights. See 534 U.S. at 122, 122 S. Ct. at 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 507. If Knights resulted in a watering down of constitutional protections, that observation escaped every member of the Supreme Court, including Justices Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer.
And if Knights really involved some deviation from historic Fourth Amendment principles, one would expect some other state court, somewhere, to have voiced disagreement. But the majority cites no example of a state court that has declined to follow Knights under its own constitution. To the contrary, just next door, in State v. Anderson, the Minnesota Supreme Court unanimously declined an invitation to depart from Knights under the Minnesota Constitution. 733 N.W.2d 128, 140 (Minn. 2007).
In this unanimous decision, the Minnesota Supreme Court observed:
The Supreme Court's decision in Knights does not appear to be a sharp or radical departure from its previous decisions or a retrenchment on its Fourth Amendment jurisprudence with respect to probation searches. Moreover, we are not convinced that federal precedent inadequately protects our citizens' basic rights and liberties. Accordingly, we decline Anderson's invitation to deem the search of his residence unreasonable under the Minnesota Constitution.
Id.
Notably, Minnesota's counterpart to the Fourth Amendment is worded quite similarly to Iowa's article I, section 8, including the presence of a semicolon between "violated" and "and." Compare Minn. Const. art. I, § 10, with Iowa Const. art I, § 8.
5. In principle number five, the majority contends that "lockstepping state law to federal precedents is not a humble or minimalist approach, but is an aggressive and maximalist approach to the law." This is a straw man attack because no member of this court has questioned its authority to independently interpret Iowa's Constitution. The issue is one of deference—do we exercise our substantial authority "in the search and seizure area with a degree of self-imposed modesty and restraint"? See Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 843 (Mansfield, J., dissenting).
I do not understand the basis for the viewpoint that we are being "humble" when we reject precedents from the United States Supreme Court and state supreme courts around the country and conclude, by ourselves, that a warrant is always necessary to search a home absent exigent circumstances (or maybe consent).
The logic of the majority's opinion would also require a warrant before searching the home of a person who is under house arrest. Does that make sense?
The implication of the majority's position is that one is being "humble" when one finds new constitutional rights and "maximalist" when one does not. This is certainly open to question. In fact, if we look at what transpired, tragically, between In re Ralph, Morris 1, 1 Morris 1 (Iowa 1839), and Dred Scott v. Sanford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393, 15 L. Ed. 691 (1857), we have a statutory interpretation of an act of Congress (In re Ralph) being overridden when the act was declared unconstitutional on the ground that it violated some previously undiscovered constitutional interpretation (Dred Scott).
Both cases involved a slave who entered free territory. In In re Ralph, the slave had entered Iowa with the consent of his master, albeit on condition that he pay a certain amount to his master "as the price  of his freedom." 1 Morris at 6. The Supreme Court of the Territory of Iowa, interpreting the Missouri Compromise of 1820, held that because Iowa was a free territory, Ralph became free once he entered Iowa with "the understanding of all parties that the slave was going to become a permanent resident of the free state or territory." Id.
In Dred Scott, the United States Supreme Court held that Dred Scott could not obtain his freedom, despite the fact that he had been brought by his master into free territory voluntarily and had spent considerable time there. 60 U.S. (19 How.) at 454, 15 L. Ed. at 721. In so ruling, the Court struck down as unconstitutional the same Missouri Compromise on which In re Ralph had relied:
[A]n act of Congress which deprives a citizen of the United States of his liberty or property, merely because he came himself or brought his property into a particular Territory of the United States, and who had committed no offence against the laws, could hardly be dignified with the name of due process of law.
. . . .
Upon these considerations, it is the opinion of the court that the act of Congress which prohibited a citizen from holding and owning property of this kind in the territory of the United States north of the line therein mentioned, is not warranted by the Constitution, and is therefore void; and that neither Dred Scott himself, nor any of his family, were made free by being carried into this territory; even if they had been carried there by the owner, with the intention of becoming a permanent resident.
Id. at 450-52, 15 L. Ed. at 719-20.
In my view, you can only draw the lesson from In re Ralph and Dred Scott that courts should be constitutional innovators if you disregard what those decisions actually say.
Since the majority accuses the dissenters of utilizing "what Professor Adrian Vermeule refers to as a 'precommitment device,' " it is worth reading the relevant section of Professor Vermeule's article. Here it is:
On this picture, free-speech doctrine is partly a judicial precommitment device and partly a prophylactic rule. It is a precommitment device insofar as judges devising free-speech doctrine at time 1 worry that at time 2 their own cognition or decision-making processes will be affected by some overpowering influence. (In the free-speech context, the influence might be the social exigency that provoked the political suppression of speech, or the offensiveness of the speech itself.) So the judges restrict their choices at time 2 by announcing, at time 1, a rule that will prevent their future selves from surrendering to the passions of the moment. It is a prophylactic device insofar as judges choosing free-speech rules at time 1 worry, not about their own future cognition, but about the cognition of other judges deciding future cases, either judges of subordinate courts or future members of the very court that devised the rule at time 1. Here the judges formulate legal doctrine in order to restrict other judges' future choices.
Adrian Vermeule, The Judicial Power in the State (and Federal) Courts, 2000 Sup. Ct. Rev. 357, 366-67 (2000) (footnotes omitted). I do not know what this verbiage means but I am confident it will not help me in deciding whether the search of Mr. Short's residence in this case was lawful.
 6. Next, the majority contends that there is a "double irony" in giving deference to United States Supreme Court interpretations of the Fourth Amendment. I will begin with the majority's first irony. The first irony is that at a time when "societies advocate renewal of federalism by returning power to the state, it is ironic that an exception is made for state judicial power."
I am not aware of any clamoring by society to give judges more power to strike down laws. The federalism movement generally focuses on two goals: (1) restraining the power of the federal government; and (2) giving states a greater ability to decide their own destiny. Expansive, idiosyncratic interpretation of article I, section 8 serves neither goal. As I pointed out in Baldon, federal officials are not bound by article I, section 8, and if the evidence from Short's house in this case had been used to prosecute Short on a federal charge, he would have no recourse. See Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 842 (Mansfield, J., dissenting). So, whatever one may say about the majority's search and seizure jurisprudence, it is not a bulwark against federal power.
Nor is the majority giving Iowans a greater opportunity to choose their own destiny. Rather, it is overriding a determination by Iowa's elected branches that searches, upon reasonable suspicion of persons who have been sentenced to probation, are an appropriate way to rehabilitate the defendant and protect the community. See, e.g., Iowa Code § 907.6 (2011) ("Probationers are subject to the conditions established by the judicial district department of correctional services subject to the approval of the court, and any additional reasonable conditions which the court or district department may impose to promote rehabilitation of the defendant or protection of the community.").
The majority's second irony runs something like this: (1) the United States Supreme Court's jurisprudence is confusing and not uniform, and (2) the Iowa Supreme Court will be able to straighten things out and provide uniformity. I think this overestimates the wisdom of this court. Justice Scalia, whose observation about "inconsistent jurisprudence" is quoted with approval by the majority, advances the view that we should go back to 1791. See Acevedo v. California, 500 U.S. 565, 583, 111 S. Ct. 1982, 1993, 114 L. Ed. 2d 619, 636 (1991) (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment). If a warrant was required for a kind of search then, it should be required for the same kind of search now. One can quibble with that approach, but it is a coherent doctrine. What is the majority's guiding principle other than a general hostility to warrantless searches?
7. The majority then goes on to say that any lack of uniformity between federal and Iowa search and seizure law "does not create a substantial burden on professional law enforcement." I question this statement.
I do not agree that all court decisions are perfect and equal. Some court decisions create needless burdens because they have incomplete reasoning, leave questions unanswered, contain unneeded dicta, or threaten to go in a direction without actually going there. No judge should ever assume that applying her or his decision will be an easy task, even for professionals.
But this gets back to my original point. When we choose to follow Federal Fourth Amendment precedent, we are following standards that have already been put into practice around the country. Those decisions have been vetted and not only by their authors. So the unanticipated consequences of those decisions, to a large degree, have already emerged and been addressed  by subsequent decisions. This is the whole idea of precedent.29 
When we embark on our own path, we do not know what the consequences will be. For example, will the majority's ruling in this case lead to fewer grants of probation and a higher rate of incarceration? I do not think the majority knows.
The majority also asserts that its approach will not burden attorneys because the work required to develop state constitutional law arguments is "not overwhelming." Here, I agree with the majority. Even when the briefs do not contain arguments under the Iowa Constitution, this court has been repeatedly willing to make the arguments for the litigants and decide them. In fact, it almost seems as if a lawyer in this court would be wiser not to develop an Iowa constitutional argument. A litigant who actually writes up an argument generally has to stand or fall on that argument, but a litigant who merely refers to the Iowa Constitution in passing gets the benefit of whatever theory this court decides to develop.
8. The majority's eighth principle is that it is better not to develop a set of "criteria" for when this court will deviate from federal precedent. The majority says we will simply exercise "our best, independent judgment of the proper parameters of state constitutional commands."
I respectfully suggest we owe the citizens of the state a bit more than this. We owe them our best independent judgment, to be sure, but that independent judgment should be tempered with respect for those who came before us and grappled with the same issues.
9. The majority's ninth principle is that when we are dealing with parallel state and federal constitutional provisions and parties do not advocate a separate Iowa constitutional standard, this court will generally apply the standard set forth in federal constitutional caselaw, but reserve the right to do so more stringently. See, e.g., State v. Kooima, 833 N.W.2d 202, 206 (Iowa 2013); State v. Tyler, 830 N.W.2d 288, 291-92 (Iowa 2013). I am puzzled why the majority mentions this alleged principle here because it is not following it today.
Needless to say, this approach, amorphous though it may be, involves at least some degree of deference to federal precedent.
 The majority's Ochoa-Pals-Baldon approach, however, is different. It gives no weight to federal precedent. According to the majority today, "we reach our decisions independently of federal constitutional analysis."
Thus, in Ochoa, this court said, "The degree to which we follow United States Supreme Court precedent, or any other precedent, depends solely upon its ability to persuade us with the reasoning of the decision." 792 N.W.2d at 267. We said so even though the defendant had not urged a separate interpretation of article I, section 8. See Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 837 (Mansfield, J., dissenting) (noting that Ochoa had not asserted that the state constitutional provision should be interpreted differently than the Fourth Amendment). In Pals, we again said that United States Supreme Court precedent was entitled to no deference, even though the defendant had not urged a different standard. See 805 N.W.2d at 771 (stating the issue presented); see also id. at 784-85 (Waterman, J., dissenting) (noting Pals never argued the Iowa Constitution provided broader protection than the Fourth Amendment).
In summary, if you read Ochoa, Pals, Baldon, and today's opinion, federal constitutional precedent gets no deference regardless of what the defendant argues. But at other times, even when the case involves article I, section 8, this court generally follows the federal framework in the absence of separate argument. See, e.g., Kooima, 833 N.W.2d at 206; Tyler, 830 N.W.2d at 291-92. Hence, in my view, the majority's ninth principle undermines the overall concept it is intended to support.
10. In its tenth and final principle, the majority again claims the mantle of precedent for itself. It says that it is simply reaffirming State v. Cline, 617 N.W.2d 277 (Iowa 2000), Ochoa, Pals, and Baldon. I disagree that Cline should be categorized with Ochoa, Pals, and Baldon for reasons I have previously discussed. Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 838-39 (Mansfield, J., dissenting) ("[Cline] was about remedy, not right."). Cline observed that the Fourth Amendment and article I, section 8 "are generally deemed to be identical, in scope, import, and purpose" and applied the same analysis under both provisions to the question of whether a violation had occurred. 617 N.W.2d at 281-82 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
The tenth principle is really just the first principle making an encore. The majority believes it is settled law (since December 2010) that United States Supreme Court search and seizure decisions are entitled to no more deference than a law review article. I continue to question that proposition and therefore file this dissent.
Waterman and Zager, JJ., join this dissent.
ZAGER, Justice (dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I believe the search in this case was constitutional under both the State and Federal Constitutions. I disagree with the majority's framing of the issue and the majority's reliance on State v. Cullison, 173 N.W.2d 533 (Iowa 1970), as controlling precedent on this issue. Though Cullison has some minimal relevance to the issue presented, I would interpret our constitution according to developments in search and seizure jurisprudence since that time and according to the particular circumstances of this case. Under that analysis, I would hold the search in this case was constitutional.
The majority curiously sidesteps the true issue in this case, which was unanswered in Ochoa and Baldon. In doing so, the majority departs from the incrementalist approach we have recently taken in search and seizure cases under the Iowa Constitution. See State v. Kern, 831 N.W.2d 149, 170 (Iowa 2013) (declining to consider whether the special-needs doctrine was viable under article I, section 8 in the absence of facts "to support an application of the doctrine in a way that reveals its purpose and rationale"); State v. Baldon, 829 N.W.2d 785, 800 (Iowa 2013) ("The narrow question before us is whether the government can conduct the search based solely on consent required to be given by parolees as a condition of release from prison."); State v. Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d 260, 291 (Iowa 2010) (emphasizing the broader questions being left unanswered). Under this approach, we have decided search and seizure cases according to the facts presented, not according to a selective reformulation of those facts. See Kern, 831 N.W.2d at 170; see also Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 801 ("We have no occasion in this case to consider other grounds available to the State to justify such a search."). The steps taken in these cases may have been small, but at least they have been based on the unique circumstances of the cases before the court.
When he was placed on probation, Short executed a probation agreement under which he consented to a search of his person, property, place of residence, vehicle, and personal effects at anytime, with or without a search warrant, "by any probation officer or law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe contraband is present." (Emphasis added.) The district court in its order referred to this language as a "waiver." There is no dispute that the probation agreement contained consent-to-search language.
In addition, the district court found the search of Lorenzen's apartment was based upon probable cause, even after acknowledging the search warrant itself was defective. Short never challenged this probable-cause finding for the search. Nevertheless, the majority characterizes the officers' individualized suspicion as only "reasonable suspicion." I believe, in light of the district court's undisputed finding of probable cause, coupled with the consent language of the probation agreement and our caselaw, we should address whether under the Federal and Iowa Constitutions, general law enforcement authorities may constitutionally conduct a warrantless search of a probationer based on the individual's waiver of his search and seizure rights and probable cause.30  The majority elects to avoid the consent issue altogether, critically diminishing its persuasiveness and effect.
The flaws of the majority's analysis do not end with the framing of the issue. In relying on Cullison, the majority asserts "[t]here can be no question that Cullison involves a holding under the Iowa Constitution." While this is true, Cullison does  not mention article I, section 8, and it clearly was not decided on this basis. A tradition carrying through this court's history, and continuing down to the present, is for this court, when interpreting a provision of the Iowa Constitution, to quote the provision, see, e.g., Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 268 (quoting article I, section 8); State v. Cline, 617 N.W.2d 277, 281 n.2 (Iowa 2000) (same), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Turner, 630 N.W.2d 601, 606 n.2 (Iowa 2001); Lee Enters., Inc. v. Iowa State Tax Comm'n, 162 N.W.2d 730, 736 (Iowa 1968) (quoting article III, section 29); Sperry & Hutchinson Co. v. Hoegh, 246 Iowa 9, 18-19, 65 N.W.2d 410, 416 (1954) (quoting article I, section 6), or to state the rule of the provision, see, e.g., Cline, 617 N.W.2d at 281 (paraphrasing article I, section 8); State v. Carter, 161 N.W.2d 722, 724 (Iowa 1968) (paraphrasing article I, section 8); State v. Cameron, 254 Iowa 505, 511, 117 N.W.2d 816, 819 (1962) (paraphrasing article I, section 10), overruled on other grounds by State v. Bowers, 661 N.W.2d 536, 543 (Iowa 2003). If not directly quoting or paraphrasing the provision, at least it has been mentioned. See, e.g., State v. Tonn, 195 Iowa 94, 103, 191 N.W. 530, 534 (1923) (mentioning the identity between the wording of article I, section 8 and the wording of the Fourth Amendment), abrogated by Cline, 617 N.W.2d at 291.31  If Cullison was interpreting article I, section 8, as the majority claims, then the case is a distinct and inexplicable oddity. For Cullison does not quote article I, section 8, and neither does it state the provision's rule. Nowhere does Cullison even mention article I, section 8 in either the majority opinion or dissents.
Most conspicuous in Cullison is the analogous federal constitutional provision, the Fourth Amendment. That constitutional provision is quoted once in its entirety. See Cullison, 173 N.W.2d at 538 (quoting Camara v. Mun. Ct., 387 U.S. 523, 528, 87 S. Ct. 1727, 1730, 18 L. Ed. 2d 930, 935 (1967)). Additional references to the Fourth Amendment are also scattered throughout. See, e.g., id. (noting that, "in the field of administrative processes involving health and safety of the people, Fourth Amendment rights are now fully respected"). Indeed, the court mentioned the Fourth Amendment more than ten times in an analysis that spans fewer than seven pages in the North Western Reporter. See, e.g., id. at 536 ("The foregoing discloses some tribunals . . . , Strip a parolee of all Fourth Amendment rights while others Dilute them."). In addition to those references to the Fourth Amendment, the court referred to the Fourteenth Amendment. The court noted that "the Fourth Amendment is enforceable against the States through the Fourteenth Amendment." Id. at 538. Were the court interpreting the Iowa Constitution, this statement would have been superfluous. Both the incorporation doctrine and the Fourteenth Amendment are irrelevant to the enforceability of the Iowa Constitution's repository of protections.32 
 Also, while the resolution of the issue in Cullison caused dissension among the court's members, it seems they were able to agree on one important point: the constitutional provision the court was interpreting. Both dissents, like the majority opinion, mentioned the Fourth Amendment. See id. at 542 (Larson, J., dissenting) ("[T]he protection afforded by the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution is only against unreasonable searches . . . ."); id. at 544 (Snell, J., dissenting) (discussing Fourth Amendment search and seizure protections). And, like the majority opinion, neither dissent mentioned article I, section 8. Thus, Cullison was a 5-4 decision that, in addition to a majority opinion, consisted of two dissenting opinions, and no justice even mentioned article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution.
Yet, in spite of the invisibility of article I, section 8 in Cullison, the majority in this case unequivocally asserts the case's holding is under that provision. I would draw the opposite conclusion in the face of the unmistakable, explicit indications to the contrary. Cullison is without question not a holding under article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution. That being so, I would conclude Cullison is not substantive authority under article I, section 8, and we are not bound to follow Cullison in this case.
Even if one were to concede somehow that Cullison was interpreting article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution, there are numerous reasons not to apply Cullison's holding to this case. See State v. Bruce, 795 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2011) (noting despite the principle of stare decisis we must reconsider unsound previous decisions). First, we have since Cullison held that when interpreting this state's constitution we rely on federal cases interpreting the Federal Constitution only to the extent that the reasoning of those cases persuades us. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 267. Cullison not only relied almost completely on federal cases while doing little analysis to establish their persuasiveness, but also hinted that, if the United States Supreme Court had addressed the issue presented in the case, it would have deferred to that tribunal's interpretation. See 173 N.W.2d at 535. Neither approach is a permissible method of resolving cases under our state's organic document. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 267; Cline, 617 N.W.2d at 285. An earlier case's inconsistency with our established current decisional methods almost compels us to reconsider the case's continued viability.
There are also factual and legal distinctions in Cullison that compel us to reconsider its continued validity. Cullison's conclusion was based in part on reasoning that is now questionable in light of subsequent developments. Cullison cited a bevy of federal cases and secondary authorities for the proposition a parolee's right to equal protection might be violated by admitting evidence obtained in a warrantless search. See 173 N.W.2d at 538. Afterward, Griffin v. Wisconsin, Samson v. California, and United States v. Knights upheld warrantless searches of probationers and parolees. See Samson, 547 U.S. 843, 857, 126 S. Ct. 2193, 2202, 165 L. Ed. 2d 250, 262 (2006); Knights, 534 U.S. 112, 122, 122 S. Ct. 587, 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d 497, 507 (2001); Griffin, 483 U.S. 868, 876, 107 S. Ct. 3164, 3169-70, 97 L. Ed. 2d 709, 719 (1987). Clearly, the development of this area of the law shows this concern no longer serves as a basis for according offenders  and law-abiding citizens equal search protections.
What makes Cullison most factually distinct is its lack of a consent-to-search provision in the parole agreement. This is a significant reason why Cullison is distinquishable from Baldon, in which such provisions became the focus of our analysis of consent and waiver. See Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 800-01 (explaining the issue before the court). The majority chooses to ignore this important distinction without further analysis, which makes the opinion suspect. How can the majority decide this case without discussing the consent-to-search provision contained in Short's probation agreement?
Also, a parole officer performed the search in Cullison. See 173 N.W.2d at 539-40. We have previously drawn a distinction between searches performed by general law enforcement officers and searches performed by corrections authorities; the justifications for the two searches are different. See Kern, 831 N.W.2d at 171 (explaining a search of a parolee could not fit "the special-needs rubric" because "the search was significantly entangled with a larger law enforcement operation"); Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 289 (distinguishing searches performed by parole officers and searches performed by general law enforcement). In this case, general law enforcement performed the search. Thus, the reasons used to reject the parole search in Cullison are not importable to this case. This further diminishes the precedential versatility of Cullison.
Finally, the search in Cullison, as in Ochoa, was not supported by any level of individualized suspicion. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 288 (noting police officer performed search without any cause); Cullison, 173 N.W.2d at 540 (concluding the presearch reasonable or probable cause, essential to its validity, was not present there or established to support the search). Because there was not even an argument of reasonable suspicion or probable cause, the court did not have to consider whether some level of individualized suspicion might have constrained officer discretion to the point of making the warrantless search constitutionally permissible. Here, there was undisputed probable cause to support the search of Short's residence. Cullison thus presented a clearly distinguishable legal and factual scenario for the decision. For all these reasons, the broad principle espoused in Cullison is not appropriately applicable to the concrete facts presented by this case. Cf. Kern, 831 N.W.2d at 170 ("[T]he need for new legal doctrines is best considered when facts exist in a case to support an application of the doctrine in a way that reveals its purpose and rationale."). Therefore, I would conclude the broad holding adopted by the majority, relying on Cullison, that a search warrant is required under all circumstances for the search of any person's home, does not prevent us from treating probationers differently from law-abiding citizens for purposes of article I, section 8.
The determination that Cullison's holding does not control the outcome of this case is just the starting point of the analysis. As the majority recognizes, we have repeatedly declined to dogmatically interpret article I, section 8 in the manner the United States Supreme Court interprets the Fourth Amendment, despite the obvious textual similarities between the two provisions. See, e.g., id. at 170 (explaining the Fourth Amendment special-needs doctrine and concluding the doctrine cannot be used "to make an end-run" around parolees' rights under the Iowa Constitution); Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 267 (holding searches and seizures are to be analyzed independently under the Iowa Constitution); Cline, 617 N.W.2d at 283 (declining  "to adopt a good faith exception to Iowa's exclusionary rule under the Iowa Constitution"). Indeed, were we "to blindly follow federal precedent," we would be abdicating our "constitutional role in state government." Cline, 617 N.W.2d at 285.
That said, we have not discarded federal precedents from the panoply of available persuasive sources. In Ochoa, we declined to follow the Supreme Court's interpretation of the Fourth Amendment in Samson, taking instead a constitutional path under our own constitution that rejected warrantless searches of parolees "without any particularized suspicion or limitations to the scope of the search." Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 291; see also Samson, 547 U.S. at 857, 126 S. Ct. at 2202, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 262 (holding "the Fourth Amendment does not prohibit a police officer from conducting a suspicionless search of a parolee"). In doing so, however, we emphasized the "respectful consideration" to which Supreme Court precedents are entitled. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 267; cf. Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 790 ("In the final analysis, our right under principles of federalism to stand as the final word on the Iowa Constitution is settled, long-standing, and good law."). Keeping that in mind, I turn now to those precedents.
The Supreme Court has twice upheld warrantless searches of probationers under the Fourth Amendment. In Griffin, probation officers conducted a warrantless search of a probationer's home under a Wisconsin probation regulation that allowed warrantless searches based on "reasonable grounds." 483 U.S. at 871, 107 S. Ct. at 3167, 97 L. Ed. 2d at 715 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Supreme Court upheld the search, finding it justified by the special needs of Wisconsin's probation system. See id. at 876, 107 S. Ct. at 3169-70, 97 L. Ed. 2d at 719. Though representative of the Supreme Court's overall search and seizure jurisprudence, Griffin's reasoning is distinguishable because police and sheriff's deputies, not probation officers, searched Short. See 5 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure: A Treatise on the Fourth Amendment § 10.10(c), at 542 (2012) [hereinafter Lafave, Search and Seizure] (observing a search performed by police officers could not pass muster under Griffin's special-needs rationale).
Later, in Knights, the Supreme Court confronted an issue very similar to one before us in this case. 534 U.S. at 118, 122 S. Ct. at 591, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 504. There, a probationer, who was subject to a probation-search condition similar to that contained in Short's probation agreement, was suspected of vandalizing a business dozens of times. See id. at 114-15, 122 S. Ct. at 589, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 502-03. After a police detective observed suspicious activity outside the probationer's apartment and viewed suspicious objects in the vehicle of the probationer's accomplice, the detective, who knew of the probation-search condition, searched the probationer's apartment. See id. at 115, 122 S. Ct. at 589, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 503. The search uncovered evidence suggesting the probationer was the vandal, and he was arrested on federal criminal charges. See id. at 115-16, 122 S. Ct. at 589, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 503.
Knights moved to suppress the evidence obtained during the warrantless search of his apartment, arguing the search violated the Fourth Amendment. See id. at 116, 122 S. Ct. at 590, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 503. The district court found law enforcement had " 'reasonable suspicion' to believe that Knights was involved with incendiary materials," but "nonetheless granted the motion to suppress on the ground that the search was for 'investigatory' rather than 'probationary' purposes." See id. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit  affirmed, relying on its earlier decisions to hold the search condition in Knights's probation order " 'must be seen as limited to probation searches, and must stop short of investigation searches.' " See id. (quoting United States v. Knights, 219 F.3d 1138, 1142-43 (9th Cir. 2000)).
A unanimous Supreme Court reversed the ruling of the court of appeals. See id. at 122, 122 S. Ct. at 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 507 (reversing and remanding for further proceedings). The Supreme Court first noted that the Supreme Court of California had already upheld searches pursuant to this California probation condition " 'whether the purpose of the search is to monitor the probationer or to serve some other law enforcement purpose.' " See id. at 116, 122 S. Ct. at 590, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 503 (quoting People v. Woods, 21 Cal. 4th 668, 88 Cal. Rptr. 2d 88, 981 P.2d 1019, 1027 (Cal. 1999), cert. denied, 529 U.S. 1023, 120 S. Ct. 1429, 146 L. Ed. 2d 319 (2000)).
The Supreme Court declined to base its holding on the "consent" rationale argued by the Government in cases such as Zap v. United States, 328 U.S. 624, 66 S. Ct. 1277, 90 L. Ed. 1477 (1946), and Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 93 S. Ct. 2041, 36 L. Ed. 2d 854 (1973). See Knights, 534 U.S. at 118, 122 S. Ct. at 591, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 504-05. The Supreme Court found it did not need to decide whether acceptance of the search condition constituted consent in the Schneckloth sense of a complete waiver of Fourth Amendment rights. See id. at 118, 122 S. Ct. at 591, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 505. Instead, it concluded that the search of Knights's apartment was reasonable under its "general Fourth Amendment approach of 'examining the totality of the circumstances,' " considering the probation search condition as being a salient circumstance. Id. (quoting Ohio v. Robinette, 519 U.S. 33, 39, 117 S. Ct. 417, 421, 136 L. Ed. 2d 347, 354 (1996)).
In rejecting Knights's argument, the Supreme Court focused on the balance of the individual's privacy interest and the government's legitimate interests. See id. at 119, 122 S. Ct. at 591, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 505. According to the Supreme Court, a probationer has a diminished expectation of privacy because probation is a criminal sanction that reasonably deprives an individual of freedoms ordinarily enjoyed by law-abiding citizens. See id. Further, the Court reasoned the government has a legitimate interest in supervising probationers, given their high probability of reoffending. See id. at 120-21, 122 S. Ct. at 592, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 506. After weighing the interests, the Supreme Court unanimously upheld the police detective's warrantless search of the probationer's apartment "supported by reasonable suspicion and authorized by a condition of probation." Id. at 122, 122 S. Ct. at 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 507.
The balancing approach the Supreme Court employed in Knights evaluates a search's reasonableness, "[t]he touchstone of the Fourth Amendment." See id. at 118-19, 122 S. Ct. at 591, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 505. (explaining how the Court tests for reasonableness); see also Samson, 547 U.S. at 848, 126 S. Ct. at 2197, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 256 (explaining the balancing test). The Supreme Court thus held that in its balancing of these various considerations, no more than reasonable suspicion is necessary to conduct a search of a probationer's house. See Knights, 534 U.S. at 121, 122 S. Ct. at 592, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 506 ("We hold that the balance of these considerations requires no more than reasonable suspicion to conduct a search of this probationer's house."). Expressed another way, the Supreme Court held that "law-enforcement searches of probationers who have been informed of a search condition are permissible upon individualized suspicion  of criminal behavior committed during the probationary period." See id. at 122, 122 S. Ct. at 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 507 (Souter, J., concurring).
There can be no reasonable dispute that Knights controls the determination whether the search of Short was constitutional under the Fourth Amendment to the Federal Constitution. Short was, like Knights, on probation, and he thus had a diminished expectation of privacy. See id. at 119, 122 S. Ct. at 591, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 505. Like the government in Knights, law enforcement in this case had a legitimate interest in supervising Short, as it does all probationers. See id. at 120, 122 S. Ct. at 592, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 506. Although the search in Knights was supported by reasonable suspicion, the search of Short was supported by probable cause, a higher level of suspicion. See id. at 122, 122 S. Ct. at 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 507. Given the relevant factual similarities and the higher level of suspicion that supported the search in this case, this search was incontestably reasonable and therefore permissible under the Fourth Amendment.
Of course, the conclusion reached by the United States Supreme Court under the Fourth Amendment does not resolve the question of the constitutionality of the search under article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution. As the majority notes, this court has resisted reasonableness as the measure of the constitutionality of a search under the Iowa Constitution. This, even though article I, section 8 mirrors the Federal Constitution regarding unreasonable seizures and searches, and this court's own statement that "[t]here is of course little doubt that, in light of the nearly identical language in article I, section 8 and the Fourth Amendment, they were generally designed with the same scope, import, and purpose." See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 267. This is also in spite of this court in Cullison explicitly looking to the factual situation in that case to determine the reasonableness of the extended search. Cullison, 173 N.W.2d at 539 ("We must look now to the factual situation here involved to determine reasonableness of the extended search . . . ." (Emphasis added.)). Completely diverging from this reasonableness approach we utilized in Cullison and emphasizing this court's traditional "warrant preference rule," we explained in Ochoa that the reasonableness clause of the Iowa Constitution "cannot be used to override the Warrant Clause" of the Iowa Constitution, lest the warrant clause be rendered surplusage. 792 N.W.2d at 269, 291; see also id. at 289 (criticizing the reasonableness test as "based not on the particular facts of a case but on larger policies bolstered by the purported needs of law enforcement"). The majority in this case wants to rely on Cullison and its analysis of the Fourth Amendment for determining the reasonableness of a search, but then disregards it in Ochoa and in this case. Instead, the majority utilizes Cullison for a broad holding for the necessity of search warrants under all circumstances when this really had nothing to do with the holding of the case. While I acknowledge in deciding whether to follow the Supreme Court's lead down any constitutional path this court is not bound to use the same analytic vehicle, there should at least be some analytical consistency.
Even our own authority leaves open the clear possibility of an exception to the warrant requirement under certain circumstances. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 287 (positing one way of resolving the issue in the case would be to accept a new exception to the warrant requirement). We have repeatedly counseled that a warrantless search is unconstitutional unless it falls within an exception to the warrant requirement. See, e.g., State v. Lowe, 812 N.W.2d 554, 568 (Iowa 2012) (explaining a  warrantless search is unreasonable if it does not fall within a recognized exception); Cline, 617 N.W.2d at 282 ("A warrantless search . . . is per se unreasonable unless it falls within a recognized exception."). Our recognized exceptions to the warrant requirement include: (1) searches founded on probable cause coupled with exigent circumstances; (2) consent searches; (3) searches incident to arrest; (4) plain view searches; and (5) community-caretaking searches. See Kern, 831 N.W.2d at 172-73 (explaining the community-caretaking exception); State v. Watts, 801 N.W.2d 845, 850 (Iowa 2011) (mentioning four exceptions to the warrant requirement); State v. Naujoks, 637 N.W.2d 101, 107 (Iowa 2001) (listing four "well-recognized exceptions to the warrant requirement"). The majority has expressed the opinion that the United States Supreme Court has "reconstructed," "reengineered," and "reconfigured" our search and seizure law resulting in the erosion of the protections afforded to individuals under the Fourth Amendment, and expressed an unwillingness to consider expanding any such exceptions under our Iowa Constitution. I think the failure to even consider well-recognized jurisprudence providing exceptions to the warrant requirement is wrong, and fails to uphold our duty to the citizens of Iowa.
As previously noted, one recognized exception to the warrant requirement under our constitution is consent. State v. Reinier, 628 N.W.2d 460, 464-65 (Iowa 2001). "Under this exception, the reasonableness requirement of the Search and Seizure Clause is satisfied when an individual consents to a search." Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 791. The consent waives an individual's rights under the Search and Seizure Clause.33  Id.
In Baldon, we held a search provision contained in a parole agreement did not constitute consent to search under the Iowa Constitution. See id. at 803. But, it is important to understand the reasoning we relied on in reaching this conclusion. First, we set aside from consideration the cases dealing with probation agreements like those we are dealing with here. See id. at 795. We said probation agreements were of limited value in analyzing the consent issue because probationers "maintain a vastly superior bargaining power than parolees." See id. We noted with approval that many courts find that this vastly superior bargaining power of probationers "renders probation agreements consensual." See id.
Second, we noted that courts in other states had rejected consent derived from parole agreements as a theory for upholding searches of parolees because such a condition of parole was coercive and therefore involuntary. See id. at 796. It was this lack of free will or "no 'choice' " if a person wanted to be released from prison, which determined our decision on consent. See id. (quoting Samson, 547 U.S. at 863 n.4, 126 S. Ct. at 2206 n.4, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 267 n.4 (Stevens, J., dissenting)).
Finally, in Baldon, we surveyed the academic community and noted it had also recognized weaknesses in treating consent searches as voluntary searches in the context of a parole agreement. See id. at 797-800. We, therefore, decided Baldon based on the vastly unequal bargaining power of the parolee, the coercive atmosphere of parole, and "no choice" concerning the search condition. We concluded  "consent under these circumstances [was] not real," and we held Baldon's acceptance of the parole agreement did not constitute voluntary consent. Id. at 802-03.
Of course, there is no similarity between the search of Baldon and the search of Short. Here, we are dealing with a probation agreement. A majority of the courts across the nation that have considered the issue have concluded that "consent-search provisions in probation agreements constitute a waiver of search-and-seizure rights." Id. at 792-93 (citing cases); see also, e.g., United States v. Barnett, 415 F.3d 690, 691 (7th Cir. 2005) ("Constitutional rights like other rights can be waived, provided that the waiver is knowing and intelligent, as it was here."); State v. Gawron, 112 Idaho 841, 736 P.2d 1295, 1297 (Idaho 1987) (upholding warrantless search of probationer based on consent contained in probation agreement); People v. Absher, 242 Ill. 2d 77, 950 N.E.2d 659, 668, 351 Ill. Dec. 163 (Ill. 2011) (upholding suspicionless search based on consent to a warrantless search). In contrast, only a few jurisdictions that have considered the issue have concluded probationers do not voluntarily consent to these search provisions. See Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 793-94 (citing cases); see also, e.g., Grubbs v. State, 373 So. 2d 905, 910 (Fla. 1979) (holding a provision in probation agreement did not establish consent, but stating that "probationary status may be used as a factor to establish probable cause"). Clearly, as these cases show, consent or waiver provisions in probation agreements do not suffer from the same constitutional infirmities as found in Baldon in the parole context. Again, the majority avoids analyzing the consent issue, despite it being raised and argued by the parties.
While a majority of courts have upheld the waiver provisions against constitutional attack in the probation context, the analysis does not end on consent alone. The surrounding circumstances of the search itself must also be considered. In our leading parole search case of Ochoa, a police officer searched a parolee's motel room without any particularized suspicion and without a warrant. 792 N.W.2d at 262. Though we explicitly considered its possibility, we declined to create a new exception to the warrant requirement in the parole context. See id. at 287 ("We would, in essence, find that the facts of this case do not establish one of the . . . exceptions to the warrant requirement."). Instead, we held warrantless, suspicionless searches of parolees invalid "even under a reasonableness analysis." Id. In doing so, we noted our holding did not reach a few questions, including "whether individualized suspicion amounting to less than probable cause may be sufficient in some contexts to support a focused search" by general law enforcement. Id. at 291. We also did not reach the question whether a warrant would even be necessary to limit law enforcement's authority to search offenders. See id. In other words, Ochoa left open the question whether a warrantless search of a parolee, supported by individualized suspicion, may be constitutionally valid, even when no other recognized warrant exception applied.
We set forth in Ochoa the primary considerations we used to resolve the issue in that case, intending that those considerations guide future cases. We traced events back to the English Crown's use of "general warrants," which were "open-ended as to time, place, and duration," but warrants nonetheless. See id. at 269. In one Eighteenth Century English case challenging a general warrant, an esteemed jurist "rejected arguments that general warrants were necessary to advance the ends of government." Id. at 270. The judge quipped, "[I]f suspicion at large should be a ground of search, . . . whose  home would be safe?" Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). This resistance to unrestrained, suspicionless warrants, expressed in English caselaw, was "well-known in the American colonies." Id.
The experience in the American colonies was similar, but the warrants issued under a different moniker. See id. at 271 (explaining writs of assistance "allowed general searches for customs violations"). "[W]rits of assistance" were broader than general warrants issued in England. Id. The writs "were not returnable after execution," continuing instead "to authorize general searches during the life of the sovereign." Id. Officials to whom the writs were issued possessed unlimited discretion. See id. Like their counterparts across the Atlantic, the colonists strongly opposed the open-ended authority conferred by the writs. See id.
We reasoned this historical background of the Fourth Amendment, and "by implication" article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution, indicated an intent to limit arbitrary searches and seizures. See id. at 272. In addition, a review of the circumstances surrounding the adoption of the Federal and Iowa Constitutions confirmed the framers sought to protect against the government abusing its power. See id. at 274. Despite ongoing current debate over whether the framers accepted warrantless searches, the historical review suggested the framers did not intend to allow law enforcement to perform "broad, unlimited" warrantless searches. Id. at 273.
We also traced the development of the United States Supreme Court's Fourth Amendment jurisprudence. See id. at 275-83 (discussing relevant precedents). After noting that exceptions for automobile searches, searches incident to arrest, and exigent circumstances still required a showing of probable cause, we described the Supreme Court's relaxation in other contexts of the probable-cause requirement. See id. at 279. For instance, the Supreme Court has carved out an exception for "special needs" not related to law enforcement when a warrant and individualized suspicion are unnecessary. See id. (explaining the development of the special-needs exception); see also, e.g., Nat'l Treasury Emps. Union v. Von Raab, 489 U.S. 656, 666, 109 S. Ct. 1384, 1391, 103 L. Ed. 2d 685, 702 (1989) (holding the U.S. Customs Service's drug-testing program presented a special need justifying a departure from the warrant and probable-cause requirements); Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 654-55, 99 S. Ct. 1391, 1396-97, 59 L. Ed. 2d 660, 668 (1979) ("In those situations in which the balance of interests precludes insistence upon 'some quantum of individualized suspicion,' other safeguards are generally relied upon to assure that the individual's reasonable expectation of privacy is not 'subject to the discretion of the official in the field . . . .' " (Footnotes omitted.) (quoting Camara, 387 U.S. at 532, 87 S. Ct. at 1733, 18 L. Ed. 2d at 937). In cases with criminal implications, however, a view remained that some restraint on law enforcement's discretion was necessary. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 280 (describing application of special-needs exception in cases with criminal implications); see also, e.g., City of Indianapolis v. Edmond, 531 U.S. 32, 44, 121 S. Ct. 447, 455, 148 L. Ed. 2d 333, 345 (2000) (holding individualized suspicion necessary at narcotics checkpoints when general interest was crime control). Whatever the implications of the search, we reasoned protection against unrestrained government intrusion depended on some form of individualized suspicion, particularity, or "preestablished neutral criteria," not on a warrant. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 280; cf. Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 667, 109 S. Ct. at 1391, 103 L. Ed. 2d at 703 (explaining one primary purpose a warrant serves is merely to advise a citizen  that a search is legally authorized). None of those limits on law enforcement was present in Ochoa.
Turning to the closely related United States Supreme Court cases, we reviewed Griffin, Knights, and Samson. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 280-83 (describing the Supreme Court's application of Fourth Amendment principles to probationers and parolees). In discussing Samson, in which the Supreme Court upheld a warrantless, suspicionless search of a parolee, we focused primarily on the dissent authored by Justice Stevens and joined by Justices Souter and Breyer. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 282-83 (noting the "vigorous dissent"). Some discussion of the dissent is therefore necessary.
In the Samson dissent, Justice Stevens inveighed against the majority for upholding "an entirely suspicionless search unsupported by any special need." 547 U.S. at 860, 126 S. Ct. at 2204, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 264 (Stevens, J., dissenting). According to the three Justices, the majority "jettisoned" individualized suspicion without substituting any standards by which to "rein in officers and furnish a bulwark against the arbitrary exercise of discretion." Id. at 860-61, 126 S. Ct. at 2204, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 265. The dissent never hinted or suggested, however, that the bulwark against arbitrary government action was under all circumstances a search warrant. On the contrary, in all the dissenters' indignation for the majority's approach, even they would have dispensed with a search warrant under the circumstances. See id. at 857, 126 S. Ct. at 2202, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 263 (arguing Knights and Griffin do not support "suspicionless searches, conducted pursuant to a blanket grant of discretion untethered by any procedural safeguards"). And the framers of the Federal Constitution would have done so as well, according to the three dissenters. See id. at 858, 126 S. Ct. at 2203, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 263 ("The suspicionless search is the very evil the Fourth Amendment was intended to stamp out."). The dissenters declared, "The requirement of individualized suspicion, in all its iterations, is the shield the Framers selected to guard against the evils of arbitrary action, caprice, and harassment." Id. at 866, 126 S. Ct. at 2207, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 268. Law enforcement here had this individualized suspicion; in fact, probable cause existed to support the search of Short's residence. Even the Samson dissenters, in all likelihood, would have upheld the search under these circumstances. The majority chooses to ignore this analysis.
Ochoa's survey did not end at the Samson dissent; however, our rejection of warrantless, suspicionless searches of parolees flowed largely from it and the historical narrative. We reasoned that law enforcement having the power to search "a parolee at any time, for anything, anywhere, including the home, without any suspicion of any kind" resembled too closely the general warrant "despised" by our forebears. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 287. Further, without some level of suspicion, even if only reasonable suspicion, there was no limit on whether a search could be conducted or on the search's scope. See id. at 288. Our constitution, we inferred from the federal experience, aimed to prohibit "[s]uch unbridled discretion." See id. After flaying the Samson majority's dubious reasoning, we concluded "a parolee may not be subjected to broad, warrantless searches by a general law enforcement officer without any particularized suspicion or limitations to the scope of the search." See id. at 291.
The takeaway from Ochoa was that the search of the parolee was unconstitutional because there was no limitation whatsoever on the police officer's discretion. See id. (taking no position regarding whether some "means other than a warrant" that limited law enforcement's power might pass constitutional muster). In Ochoa, the police officer lacked even a hunch on which to base the search. See id. at 288. This sought-after search power was "stunningly broad," enabling law enforcement to search any parolee's "books, records, diaries, invoices, and intimate surroundings" without limitation. See id. at 287-88. A power so broad could not be reconciled with a constitutional limitation on governmental search authority.
The search conducted in this case, in comparison to the searches conducted in Ochoa and Baldon, is clearly distinguishable. The search in this case "met the most stringent" Fourth Amendment search standard, "probable cause." See United States v. Flynn, 664 F.2d 1296, 1300 n.8 (5th Cir. 1982) (declining to consider whether airplanes should be given the same constitutional treatment as cars because probable cause existed). Moreover, the scope was narrow, enabling officers to search only for evidence of the crime that Short was suspected of committing. Had these circumstances been present in Ochoa, this court might have joined with the nine Justices of the United States Supreme Court willing to discard the search-warrant requirement in Samson. Our search of cases involving parolees following Ochoa has indicated nothing to the contrary. See Kern, 831 N.W.2d at 176 (concluding officers lacked probable cause to perform exigent-circumstances search of parolee's home); Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 789 (noting the state never argued that it had even reasonable suspicion to search parolee).
As noted above, our constitutional independence frees this court from applying the reasoning the United States Supreme Court used to uphold the warrantless search of the probationer in Knights. That reasoning, which rests on judgments about a probationer's privacy expectations and which was similarly applied to parolees in Samson, has been criticized as "totally circular." See 5 LaFave, Search and Seizure § 10.10(c), at 544 (explaining the circularity of the Court's logic in Knights); Samson, 547 U.S. at 857-58, 126 S. Ct. at 2202-03, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 263 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (chastising the majority's combination of "faulty syllogism" and "circular reasoning"). Even so, it is undeniable that "by virtue of their status alone, probationers ' "do not enjoy the absolute liberty to which every citizen is entitled." ' " Samson, 547 U.S. at 848-49, 126 S. Ct. at 2197, 165 L. Ed. 2d at 257 (quoting Knights, 534 U.S. at 119, 122 S. Ct. at 587, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 505). This commonsense observation provides initial support for differential treatment of probationers and law-abiding citizens under article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution.
In Iowa, the lowest level probationers do not enjoy the liberty to which law-abiding citizens are entitled. Iowa Code chapter 901B sets forth a "corrections continuum." See Iowa Code § 901B.1(1) (2013). Probation, like parole, falls on "Level Two" of the corrections continuum, see id. § 901B.1(1)(b), sandwiched between "Level One," "[n]oncommunity based corrections sanctions," see id. § 901B.1(1)(a), and "Level Three," "[q]uasi-incarceration sanctions," see id. § 901B.1(1)(c). Level two is further divided into three levels of sanctions, all of which contemplate at least supervision by corrections authorities. See id. § 901B.1(1)(b)(1)-(3). Probationers subject to monitored sanctions "are monitored for compliance" with "administrative supervision sanctions" by corrections authorities. See id. § 901B.1(1)(b)(1). Supervised sanctions, the middle level, are regular probation supervision and any conditions in the probation  agreement or court order. See id. § 901B.1(1)(b)(2). Finally, intensive supervision sanctions, in addition to subjecting a probationer to intense monitoring, provide for "electronic monitoring, day reporting, day programming, live-out programs for persons on work release or who have violated chapter 321J, and institutional work release under section 904.910." Id. § 901B.1(1)(b)(3). As may readily be seen, this legislative scheme envisions subjecting all probationers to governmental scrutiny to which no ordinary citizen is subject, thus depriving even the lowest level probationers of some degree of liberty.
Probation conditions may further abridge a probationer's liberty. Iowa Code section 907.6 grants broad authority for doing so:
Probationers are subject to the conditions established by the judicial district department of correctional services subject to the approval of the court, and any additional reasonable conditions which the court or district department may impose to promote rehabilitation of the defendant or protection of the community. Conditions may include but are not limited to adherence to regulations generally applicable to persons released on parole and including requiring unpaid community service as allowed pursuant to section 907.13.
Among the parole regulations to which a probationer may be subject is the requirement that the probationer "secure and maintain employment." Iowa Admin. Code r. 201—45.2(1)(c) (2013). Another regulation prohibits a probationer from travelling outside his or her county of residence without permission. See id. r. 201—45.2(1)(d). Before leaving the state, a probationer must "secure advance written permission." Id. A probationer may not change residences without permission. Id. r. 201—45.2(1)(e). A probationer may also be compelled to "cooperate in any treatment/rehabilitation/monitoring program" specified by corrections authorities. Id. r. 201—45.2(1)(i). These restrictions are strong and significantly limit a probationer's freedom, but as the statute makes plain, these are additional conditions to which a probationer might be subjected.
Iowa Code section 907.6 also authorizes courts to impose probation conditions. Courts may not impose unreasonable or arbitrary conditions. State v. Rogers, 251 N.W.2d 239, 243 (Iowa 1977). Otherwise, courts' authority under this provision is broad. State v. Valin, 724 N.W.2d 440, 445 (Iowa 2006). We have approved a court's order that a probationer spend six months in a residential treatment facility, even when it meant displacing the probationer's child. See State v. Ogle, 430 N.W.2d 382, 383 (Iowa 1988) (finding district court did not abuse its discretion when imposing the probation condition). For its holding that a court is within its discretion even to tell a probationer where and with whom to live, Ogle exemplifies the impressive loss of freedom to which probationers are subject. See id. Such deprivation is necessary to promote the probationer's rehabilitation and to protect the community. See id. at 384 (upholding probation condition); see also Iowa Code § 907.6 (providing conditions may be imposed "to promote rehabilitation of the defendant or protection of the community").
Our caselaw, our statutes, and our regulations are evidence of a fundamental notion in our law. They show that deeply embedded in our system of law is the notion individuals sentenced for crimes, including those who remain outside a prison's walls, do not enjoy the same complement of liberties as those of law-abiding citizens. Probationers, unlike ordinary citizens, must comply with stringent conditions  under the watchful supervision of courts and corrections authorities. That our law permits this treatment differential is undeniable. It follows from this fundamental notion that probationers may be accorded different treatment under some constitutional provisions, provided governmental authority is adequately constrained.
Besides our jurisprudence on consent, one additional constraint on governmental authority is individualized suspicion. As we said in Cullison, "the basic purpose of [the search and seizure protection], as recognized in countless decisions of this Court, is to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions by government officials." See 173 N.W.2d at 538 (emphasis added). As all of the cases that have addressed searches of this nature confirm, it is this arbitrary and suspicionless search that is the crucial distinction between this case and the similar cases that have come before this court. See Kern, 831 N.W.2d at 176 (concluding officers lacked probable cause); Baldon, 829 N.W.2d at 789 (noting the State never argued that it had individualized suspicion to search parolee); Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 288 (noting police officer performed search without any individualized suspicion); Cullison, 173 N.W.2d at 540 (finding there was no "reasonable or probable cause" to support search). That the officers here had probable cause to search Lorenzen's apartment negates a comparison between the search performed in this case and "the despised general warrant." See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 287. It was the general warrant's conferral of unrestrained discretion upon law enforcement that was an impetus for the Fourth Amendment. See id.
The officers who searched Short operated under no such unrestrained or arbitrary discretion. Rather, having established through diligent investigation probable cause to believe Short committed a burglary, law enforcement applied for a search warrant. While the search warrant issued was ultimately determined to be invalid, the probable-cause finding by the independent judicial officer was never challenged. Not surprisingly, the stolen property was found at the apartment.
The probable-cause requirement significantly restrains law enforcement discretion. This standard is considerably more protective of probationers' rights than the reasonable-suspicion standard upon which the search in Knights was upheld. See 534 U.S. at 122, 122 S. Ct. at 593, 151 L. Ed. 2d at 507 (upholding warrantless search of a probationer supported by reasonable suspicion); see also Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 330, 110 S. Ct. 2412, 2416, 110 L. Ed. 2d 301, 309 (1990) (explaining that "[r]easonable suspicion is a less demanding standard than probable cause"); State v. Lewis, 675 N.W.2d 516, 525 (Iowa 2004) ("The reasonable and articulable suspicion standard . . . is less than probable cause."). To satisfy the reasonable-suspicion requirement, an officer need only have specific, articulable facts. See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 21, 88 S. Ct. 1868, 1880, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 906 (1968). In Griffin, for instance, the United States Supreme Court found an unauthenticated tip that a probationer " 'had or might have' " guns adequate to supply reasonable suspicion. 483 U.S. at 878, 107 S. Ct. at 3171, 97 L. Ed. 2d at 720. The Supreme Court determined, however, the same tip would not supply probable cause. See id.
In Iowa, "[t]he standard for probable cause is whether a person of reasonable prudence would believe a crime has been committed or that evidence of a crime might be located in the particular area to be searched." Naujoks, 637 N.W.2d at 108. Probable cause demands from law  enforcement facts suggesting that the items sought in the search are linked to criminal activity and that those items will be found in the place to be searched. See State v. Gogg, 561 N.W.2d 360, 363 (Iowa 1997); see also State v. Thomas, 540 N.W.2d 658, 662-63 (Iowa 1995) ("The facts and information presented to establish this finding need not rise to the level of absolute certainty, rather, it must supply sufficient facts to constitute a fair probability that contraband or evidence will be found on the person or in the place to be searched."). Applying the probable cause standard, we have invalidated searches on numerous occasions. See, e.g., Kern, 831 N.W.2d at 176 (holding officers lacked probable cause to search parolee's home); Lewis, 675 N.W.2d at 525 (concluding officers lacked probable cause to make a warrantless entry into a backyard); State v. Myers, 570 N.W.2d 70, 75 (Iowa 1997) (concluding that "there was not probable cause for issuance of the search warrant"); Thomas, 540 N.W.2d at 666 (holding no probable cause existed to search all persons in a bar). The probable cause requirement's insistence on sufficient facts provides a strong protection against arbitrary searches by law enforcement officers.
In addition, the concept of probable cause encompasses a number of legal rules designed to limit officers' discretion and therefore to protect individuals' rights. In Kern, for example, we rejected the argument an individual's invocation of constitutional rights could be used by officers to establish probable cause. See 831 N.W.2d at 176. We also held a "defensive posture by an occupant of a home in response to an intrusion by police is not indicative of probable cause of a crime." Id. These legal rules further restrain officers' discretion to perform searches.
A strict requirement that officers have individualized suspicion before searching a probationer therefore alleviates our predominant concern in Ochoa—that unrestrained general law enforcement could intrude on a probationer's privacy and rifle through the probationer's possessions anytime, anywhere, without a warrant, to find evidence of a crime. See 792 N.W.2d at 287-88. Consistent with current Fourth Amendment jurisprudence and our own precedents, I would require that law enforcement must have at least individualized suspicion before law enforcement officers can search a probationer or the residence.
Here, deputies established probable cause for the search by applying for a search warrant. To do so, Deputy Bartolozzi carefully set forth "facts, information, and circumstances," including a police report and officer statements describing the burglary. See Iowa Code § 808.3 (describing the necessary contents of an application for a search warrant). The exhibits attached to the application described in detail the items taken in the burglary that deputies expected to find in the residence. Deputy Bartolozzi also described in detail the place to be searched, going so far as to include a picture and description of the residence, which was only later determined to be incorrect. An independent review by a judicial officer determined there was probable cause for the search and granted the search warrant based on Deputy Bartolozzi's scrupulous and earnest efforts. Though the search warrant was later invalidated due to an incorrect address, probable cause was undisputedly established, and the correct address was subject to the search.
In addition to the finding of probable cause by an independent judicial officer, there were other forms of restraint on law enforcement's discretion in this case. The  greatest concern with granting officers the authority to perform suspicionless searches of parolees in Ochoa was that the authority was neither "minimal and highly-defined," nor "closely linked to an identified special need." See 792 N.W.2d at 288. The search executed by the deputies in this case, however, was narrow and defined. Consistent with the warrant application, deputies searched for, and found, televisions, jewelry, shoes, and other items they believed would be found in the apartment based on their investigation. Unlike the search in Ochoa, the search here was not "contrary to the common-sense notion that 'the scope of the search must be strictly tied to and justified by the circumstances which rendered its initiation permissible.' " See 792 N.W.2d at 288 (quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 19, 88 S. Ct. at 1878, 20 L. Ed. 2d at 904). Rather, the search of Short was consistent with that notion. The limited scope of the search further controlled officer discretion.
The officers' knowledge Short was on probation also restrained law enforcement discretion. This is not a situation like that of In re Tyrell J., in which the California Supreme Court upheld a police officer's warrantless search of a juvenile probationer, even though the officer was unaware the juvenile was on probation. See 8 Cal. 4th 68, 32 Cal. Rptr. 2d 33, 876 P.2d 519, 530 (Cal. 1994), overruled by In re Jaime P., 40 Cal. 4th 128, 51 Cal. Rptr. 3d 430, 146 P.3d 965, 972 (Cal. 2006). In requiring law enforcement to first ascertain whether an individual is on probation, we avoid the possibility officers will search an individual "in the bare hope" the individual is on probation. See Jaime P., 146 P.3d at 969. To adequately restrain law enforcement discretion, officers must not only establish individualized suspicion, but also ascertain whether the individual to be searched is on probation. See Ochoa, 792 N.W.2d at 291 (explaining one reason for rejecting the warrantless, suspicionless search was that there was no available means of controlling arbitrary searches). Both requirements are integral to the prevention of arbitrary searches, and both requirements are present and have been met in this case.
Finally, in his probation agreement, Short consented to the warrantless search. At the time of the search, Short was on probation for third-degree theft, an aggravated misdemeanor. See Iowa Code § 714.2(3) ("Theft in the third degree is an aggravated misdemeanor."). Short could have been sentenced to prison for up to two years. See id. § 903.1(2) ("When a person is convicted of an aggravated misdemeanor . . . the maximum penalty shall be imprisonment not to exceed two years."). Rather than being sentenced to serve a prison sentence, Short requested a suspended sentence and received a suspended sentence and probation. As part of that bargain, Short voluntarily agreed to subject himself to warrantless searches by law enforcement and corrections authorities alike. The consent provision is not alone a basis to uphold the search, but Short's consent in the probation agreement should be a critical factor in upholding the search in this case. The lack-of-bargaining rationale we utilized in Baldon to conclude there was no voluntary consent to the search, is not applicable in the present case.
We would not be alone in holding law enforcement may search probationers without a warrant. Numerous state courts have upheld warrantless searches of probationers and parolees, some supported by individualized suspicion and some requiring probable cause. See State v. Montgomery, 115 Ariz. 583, 566 P.2d 1329, 1331 (Ariz. 1977) (upholding constitutionality of a probation condition that permitted warrantless searches by law enforcement); State  v. Fields, 67 Haw. 268, 686 P.2d 1379, 1390 (Haw. 1984) (holding a warrantless search of a probationer must be supported by reasonable suspicion); Gawron, 736 P.2d at 1297 (upholding a warrantless search of a probationer); State v. Schlechty, 926 N.E.2d 1, 8 (Ind. 2010) (upholding warrantless search of a probationer supported by reasonable suspicion); State v. Bennett, 288 Kan. 86, 200 P.3d 455, 463 (Kan. 2009) (rejecting a suspicionless search of a probationer on grounds that the search must "be based on a reasonable suspicion"); Parks v. Commonwealth, 192 S.W.3d 318, 330 (Ky. 2006) (upholding a probation condition allowing law enforcement, on reasonable suspicion, to search a probationer without a warrant); State v. Malone, 403 So. 2d 1234, 1239 (La. 1981) (holding a warrantless probation search need only be supported by reasonable suspicion); State v. Burke, 235 Mont. 165, 766 P.2d 254, 257 (Mont. 1988) (holding permissible a warrantless search of a probationer supported by reasonable cause); People v. Hale, 93 N.Y.2d 454, 714 N.E.2d 861, 862, 865, 692 N.Y.S.2d 649 (N.Y. 1999) (upholding search of a probationer's home under a court-ordered probation condition); State v. Schlosser, 202 N.W.2d 136, 139 (N.D. 1972) (upholding a warrantless search of a probationer); State v. Turner, 297 S.W.3d 155, 169 (Tenn. 2009) (upholding under the Tennessee Constitution a warrantless, suspicionless search of a parolee); State v. Winterstein, 167 Wn.2d 620, 220 P.3d 1226, 1230 (Wash. 2009) (holding probation officers must have probable cause before performing a warrantless search). Though of diverse reasoning, these cases set forth the principle that probationers and parolees may be searched upon a different set of circumstances than law-abiding citizens. I would decide this case according to those well-established principles.
Consent-to-search provisions in probation agreements advance the interests of both offender rehabilitation and societal protection. Probationers who have agreed to warrantless searches are more likely to abide by the law:
The condition of probation that defendant consent to a search of his person by a law enforcement officer without a search warrant is a supervisorial procedure related to his reformation and rehabilitation in light of the offense of which he was convicted. With knowledge he may be subject to a search by law enforcement officers at any time, he will be less inclined to [violate the law].
People v. Kern, 264 Cal. App. 2d 962, 965, 71 Cal. Rptr. 105 (Ct. App. 1968); accord People v. Bravo, 43 Cal. 3d 600, 238 Cal. Rptr. 282, 738 P.2d 336, 342 (Cal. 1987); Himmage v. State, 88 Nev. 296, 496 P.2d 763, 765 (Nev. 1972); State v. Benton, 82 Ohio St. 3d 316, 1998 Ohio 386, 695 N.E.2d 757, 761-62 (Ohio 1998); see also Hale, 714 N.E.2d at 865 ("[O]ne way to encourage [the probationer to comply with the law] was to hold out the possibility that he would be checked up on, and stood to be incarcerated if he betrayed the terms of his negotiated probationary status."). Of course, a probationer who is more likely to abide by the law is also less likely to harm others. See Owens v. Kelley, 681 F.2d 1362, 1367 (11th Cir. 1982) (recognizing that probationary searches protect society "by the deterrent effect of the condition"). Consent-to-search agreements also "enhanc[e] the ability of law enforcement officers to detect any unlawful . . . activities." Id. "[I]f a defendant considers the conditions of probation too harsh, he has the right to refuse probation and undergo the sentence." Gawron, 736 P.2d at 1297. Despite these obvious benefits, the majority fails even to discuss these widely used consent-to-search agreements as part of its analysis of this case and blindly follows the Fourth Amendment precedent found in Cullison.
 Based on all of the above considerations, I would hold the search of Short and his residence was permissible under not only the Fourth Amendment, but also under article I, section 8 of the Iowa Constitution. Such a conclusion is consistent with our precedents and the national consensus. After a diligent investigation, deputies established probable cause to believe evidence of the burglary was in Leya Lorenzen's apartment, where Short was residing. Even knowing Short was on probation and subject to the consent-to-search provision of his probation agreement, law enforcement officers still established probable cause for the search and executed the narrow search for evidence. Upon doing so, they discovered the evidence they sought. Even without a warrant, the consent provided by the probation agreement, combined with the existence of probable cause and the narrow scope of the search, adequately restrained officer discretion.
The majority blindly elects to adhere to an absolute search warrant requirement as set forth in Cullison without considering the changing analysis of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, and the jurisprudence found in other nationwide authority. Such adherence to the past, based on an underlying belief that the United States Supreme Court has eroded and diluted the rights of ordinary citizens to the protections under the Fourth Amendment, and that only a warrant will suffice, is unsound and illogical. The search in this case was constitutionally permissible under article I, section 8 of our Iowa Constitution and our precedents.
I would affirm.
Waterman, J., joins this dissent in part, and Mansfield, J., joins this dissent.

 

