 specially).
I join the majority opinion. I write separately to explain briefly why I agree with the determinations of the district court and the court of appeals that did not find probable cause to believe Darreon Draine was "suffering from a mental disorder which  prevent[ed] the defendant from appreciating the charge, understanding the proceedings, or assisting effectively in the defense." Iowa Code ยง 812.3(1) (2018). To be sure, the dissent raises some legitimate overall concerns about juveniles and their competency to stand trial. However, I am not convinced they are manifested in this particular case.
A critical point is that Draine had been seen repeatedly over the years by mental health professionals, partly at the insistence of his mother. They had diagnosed his issues as behavioral. This is not a situation of a young man falling through the cracks and not receiving diagnosis or treatment. In December 2017, a detailed evaluation by a psychiatrist concluded that Draine exhibited "ADHD Combined type," "Conduct Disorder Childhood-Onset," "Nonadherence to Medical Treatment," "Oppositional Defiant Disorder," and "Intellectual Disability Mild." In fact, an earlier note had stated, "The doctors think he is functioning higher than what his IQ shows." On January 9, 2018, the same psychiatrist followed up with the Iowa Department of Human Services and gave the following verbal recommendation:
[B]ecause this is primarily behaviors he really should go into the juvenile system and be held accountable for these behaviors as medicines are not a fix . . . [H]e has been given every opportunity at every level to work on these behaviors and has chosen not to do so.
Two weeks later, Draine beat up a thirty-year-old staff member at his latest placement, giving him a concussion along with other cranial and facial injuries and leading to the criminal charge in this case.
Thus, when Draine's attorney filed his April 2018 motion for competency evaluation in the present case, a psychiatric evaluation of Draine had just occurred four months earlier. This psychiatrist, like other mental health professionals before him, had concluded that Draine's issues were mainly behavioral. The district court reviewed these records and discussed them when it denied Draine's motion for competency evaluation.
Furthermore, while attorney representations to the court should always be taken seriously, the district court here did exactly that. Draine's attorney made three points at the hearing. First, he noted that in their most recent meeting, Draine had "misidentified [him] as his juvenile court attorney as opposed to his District Court attorney initially." This strikes me as unexceptional for a person who is enmeshed in the legal system and has different appointed counsel serving different roles. Second, the attorney said that after he "got through what [he] wanted to get through fairly quickly, probably in about 20 minutes or so," and as he was getting ready to leave, Draine threatened him "first for talking with him and then for looking at him." Third, the attorney relayed secondhand reports of Draine urinating all over his jail cell and "engag[ing] in continuous threatening behavior at the jail." The district court specifically discussed the second and third representations in its ruling on Draine's motion, finding them characteristic of the previously diagnosed behavioral issues.
We also have transcripts of the guilty plea and sentencing proceedings. These support the conclusions of the district court and the court of appeals that Draine understood the proceedings against him and his issues were behavioral. Notably, at the guilty plea hearing, Draine and his counsel made a clarification about Draine not having struck the victim with a radio:
MR. TUPPER: Your Honor, just for clarity of the record, Mr. Draine and I had discussed this matter multiple times previously. He does indicate that the  portion of the Minutes of Testimony in the police reports where it is said he struck Mr. White with a radio -- he indicates that didn't happen, but he does admit the other portions of the assault where he was striking Mr. White with his fist. So there is a portion of the Minutes that he does disagree with, and I just wanted to clarify that.
THE COURT: Very well.
MR. TUPPER: Do you agree with that?
THE DEFENDANT: Yeah.
Then, at sentencing, Draine made the same clarification without the assistance of counsel:
I shouldn't go like to prison or nothing, because I didn't hit the dude with a radio, I hit him with my closed fist. So I shouldn't go to prison or Eldora or anything like that. I should be on probation here with my mom, you know, my family. So that's all I got.
Accordingly, not only did Draine understand the charges against him, he understood them well enough to insist on making a factual clarification and argue why it should mitigate his punishment.
State v. Einfeldt is a different case. See 914 N.W.2d 773 (Iowa 2018). There, the defendant had a prior diagnosis of mental illness and was engaging in bizarre courtroom behavior. See id. at 781-83. State v. Kempf is also a different case. See 282 N.W.2d 704 (Iowa 1979). There, the sixteen-year-old defendant had a "limited grasp of reality," was allowed to plead guilty against his attorney's recommendation, and was sent for a psychiatric evaluation following the guilty plea that the district court disregarded. See id. at 707-10.
For the foregoing reasons, I specially concur.
Waterman and Christensen, JJ., join this special concurrence.
