 in part and dissenting in part).
I concur in part and dissent in part. I agree that probation is a form of punishment under our law. Therefore, the Double Jeopardy Clause requires that Jepsen receive some credit for time spent on probation. See North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 718, 89 S. Ct. 2072, 2077, 23 L. Ed. 2d 656 (1969) (stating that "punishment already endured [must be] fully subtracted from any new sentence imposed"), overruled on other grounds by Alabama v. Smith, 490 U.S. 794, 798, 109 S. Ct. 2201, 2204, 104 L. Ed. 2d 865 (1989). However, a one-to-one credit, i.e., one day deducted from Jepsen's prison sentence for each day previously spent on probation, is neither constitutionally required nor appropriate in this case.
Christopher Jepsen was convicted in 2011 of two counts of third-degree sexual abuse for repeated sex acts he perpetrated on two victims. The victims were thirteen and fourteen years old respectively; Jepsen was twenty-five years old at the time. Jepsen received two indeterminate ten-year prison terms, to run consecutively, but the prison terms were suspended and he was placed on five years' probation.
While on probation, Jepsen got married and had a daughter. In October 2014, a search was conducted on Jepsen's residence pursuant to a warrant and he admitted to viewing child pornography. A motion to revoke probation was filed, continued, and remained pending. In the fall of 2015, Jepsen's spouse found that Jepsen had been creating fake email and Facebook accounts and using them to contact girls and arrange for naked photos to be exchanged. Jepsen's spouse separated from him at that time.
On December 21, 2015, the State filed a motion to correct an illegal sentence, because Jepsen should not have been eligible for probation.2  The motion was heard on January 29, 2016. The State requested that the two ten-year prison terms be imposed consecutively, with credit only for jail time; Jepsen requested that they be imposed concurrently, with credit both for jail time and for time spent on probation. The district court resentenced Jepsen to two ten-year sentences of incarceration, to run concurrently. The court at the same time granted Jepsen credit for days spent in jail but denied credit for time spent on probation.
Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 2.24(5)(b) is directly on point. It provides that when an illegal sentence is corrected, "[t]he defendant shall receive full credit for time spent in custody under the sentence prior to correction or reduction." Iowa R. Crim. P. 2.24(5)(b) (emphasis added). Thus, the rules of criminal procedure, which have the force and effect of law, see State v. Mootz, 808 N.W.2d 207, 221 (Iowa 2012), require a credit only for time in custody, not time spent living at home, getting married, and having a daughter while on probation.
Here the Double Jeopardy Clause requires us to deviate from rule 2.24(5)(b). But we should minimize the deviation in order to be as faithful as possible to the  rule. Separation of powers requires no less.
The Double Jeopardy Clause does not mandate a one-to-one credit that treats all forms of probation the same as actual custody. It requires only a credit that takes into account the degree of restraint on liberty. As the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit has said,
We note, however, that "fully crediting" probation against a subsequent sentence of imprisonment does not require a day-to-day offset against time to be served in prison. Time served in home detention is normally far less onerous than imprisonment, and time served on probation without home detention is even less restrictive of a defendant's freedom. Thus, a sentence on remand that reduced imprisonment by one day for each day that Martin served in home detention would be too lenient to represent the punishment that Congress intended.
United States v. Martin, 363 F.3d 25, 39-40 (1st Cir. 2004) (footnote omitted) (citation omitted). The First Circuit in Martin reiterated, "[A] departure that 'fully credits' the time Martin has already served will provide less than one-to-one credit for each day of home detention and probation." Id. at 40.
Other jurisdictions either agree with the First Circuit or hold that the Double Jeopardy Clause does not demand any credit against prison time for time previously spent on probation prior to resentencing. See United States v. Carpenter, 320 F.3d 334, 346 (2d Cir. 2003) ("[T]he conditions of home detention are typically much less onerous than even the least restrictive institutional incarceration. We would be puzzled if, on remand, the district court reduced Carpenter's term of imprisonment by more than half the time he spent in home detention."); People v. Whitfield, 228 Ill. 2d 502, 888 N.E.2d 1166, 1176, 321 Ill. Dec. 233 (Ill. 2007) (finding that a defendant who previously served a void probation sentence need not be given credit against prison time because probation "is not a 'punishment' in the same sense as imprisonment is a punishment"); State v. Brooke, No. 52408, 1987 Ohio App. LEXIS 8166, 1987 WL 15253, at *2 (Ohio Ct. App. Aug. 6, 1987) (holding that the trial court complied with the Double Jeopardy Clause in giving credit upon resentencing for twenty-four days spent in jail and three weeks spent in compulsory inpatient treatment but not a year spent on probation); State v. Sulayman, 97 Wn. App. 185, 983 P.2d 672, 675-76 (Wash. Ct. App. 1999) (granting the state's sentencing appeal and stating that "[a]lthough not constitutionally mandated, we direct that the sentencing court consider and credit as it deems appropriate time Sulayman spent under community supervision"); see also United States v. Defterios, 195 Fed. App'x 685, 687 (9th Cir. 2006) (finding no double jeopardy violation when a defendant who was resentenced to a lengthier prison term was denied "credit for time already served on supervised release toward his new term of imprisonment"). The majority cites no case to the contrary.
The majority implicitly concedes that its ruling may result in "a windfall to the defendant." Still, it maintains that we would give the constitutional requirements "lip service" if we do not always equate time spent on probation to time spent in custody. It invokes "the constitutional principles at stake" as well "the values and principles" of our Constitution. To support these sweeping statements, the majority compares what it is doing in the present case to the exclusionary rule.
The analogy is flawed. We apply the exclusionary rule on appeal to remove the effects of an unconstitutional search or seizure from a criminal proceeding, but we  still allow the state to retry the defendant. Similarly, here, we can vacate a sentence that unconstitutionally denies any credit to the defendant, but this shouldn't prevent the district court (or this court) from imposing a sentence that allows an appropriate credit that complies with the Double Jeopardy Clause. That's what several of the foregoing courts have done, and they too recognize the constitutional principles and values at stake.
One further reason not to impose a one-to-one credit is that it would defeat the district court's sentencing plan. The court sentenced Jepsen with the understanding that he would receive credit only for time previously served in custody.
In sum, nothing in the Double Jeopardy Clause requires Jepsen to be given four years plus of prison credit for time he spent getting married, having a family, and not dealing with the problem that led to his two sexual abuse convictions in the first place. See Martin, 363 F.3d at 41 ("Allowing Martin to escape a proper sentence because the district court chose home detention in lieu of prison would merely compound judicial error.")3  Therefore, I support either of the following: (1) a remand for the district court to determine an appropriate credit against prison time for time Jepsen spent on probation, taking into account the relative restraint on liberty; or (2) our granting Jepsen a credit of one-fifth day for each day spent on probation. See United States v. Derbes, No. CR. NO. 02-10391-RGS, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 19666, 2004 WL 2203478, at *2 n.6 (D. Mass. Oct. 1, 2004) (treating five days of probation as roughly the equivalent of a day in custody for credit purposes).
For the foregoing reasons, I concur in part and dissent in part.
Waterman, J., joins this concurrence in part and dissent in part.
ZAGER, Justice (dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. While I agree with the majority that the district court was required to address the issue of Jepsen's illegal sentence first, I disagree with the majority conclusion that there was a violation of his constitutional right to be free from double jeopardy because Jepsen was not given credit for the time he served on probation.
The majority cites North Carolina v. Pearce to support its holding that Jepsen's right to be free from double jeopardy was violated, thereby entitling him to receive credit toward his prison sentence for the time he spent on probation for the same offense. 395 U.S. 711, 89 S. Ct. 2072, 23 L. Ed. 2d 656 (1969), overruled on other grounds by Alabama v. Smith, 490 U.S. 794, 798, 109 S. Ct. 2201, 2204, 104 L. Ed. 2d 865 (1989). In Pearce, one of the defendants whose criminal conviction had been set aside was retried, convicted again, and  resentenced without receiving credit for the time he had already spent in prison for the same crime. Id. at 713-15, 89 S. Ct. at 2074-75 The United States Supreme Court reversed the new sentence, holding that the Fifth Amendment right to be free from double jeopardy "is violated when punishment already exacted for an offense is not fully 'credited' in imposing sentence upon a new conviction for the same offense." Id. at 718, 89 S. Ct. 2077. Consequently, the defendant was given credit for the time he previously served against the new sentence imposed following his retrial. Id. at 719, 89 S. Ct. at 2077.
Our court now seeks to extend the Supreme Court holding in Pearce far beyond the circumstances presented in Pearce. The majority would stretch that same proposition to cases where the defendant spent time on probation as part of an illegal sentence—before receiving a prison sentence—to correct an illegal sentence for the same offense. This is unnecessary and unwarranted. While the Supreme Court in Pearce issued its holding based on a situation involving credit for prison time served, and similarly made comments in dicta about giving credit for fines already paid, id. at 718 n.12, 89 S. Ct. at 2077 n.12 it never considered whether a defendant should be given credit toward a prison sentence for the time the defendant spent on probation for the same offense. Unlike the defendant in Pearce, Jepsen was not retried and reconvicted after he served time in prison for the same offense. Instead, Jepsen was sentenced to a period of probation. It was later discovered to be an illegal sentence because he was required to be sentenced to prison for his offense. Jepsen was subsequently sentenced to his lawful prison term for the same offense when the resentencing court corrected his illegal sentence. Thus, despite the helpful guidance Pearce provides on double jeopardy issues, it does not control the issue in front of our court in this case.
Probation, although mildly punitive in the minor restrictions it places on the defendant, should not be equated with punishment in the same way incarceration is considered for double jeopardy purposes.
A person does not serve a prison sentence while on probation or parole any more than he does while free on bail. In both instances, there are certain restrictions generally on the person's movements but the person's condition . . . "is very different from that of confinement in a prison."
Hall v. Bostic, 529 F.2d 990, 992 (4th Cir. 1975) (quoting Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 482, 92 S. Ct. 2593, 2601, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484, (1972)); see also Kaplan v. Hecht, 24 F.2d 664, 665 (2d Cir. 1928) ("[P]robation is not intended to be the equivalent of imprisonment.").
In People v. Whitfield, the Illinois Supreme Court concluded probation differed from incarceration for double jeopardy purposes when it considered a nearly identical situation to the circumstances presented in this case. 228 Ill. 2d 502, 888 N.E.2d 1166, 1176, 321 Ill. Dec. 233 (Ill. 2007). There, the trial court sentenced defendant to two years' probation after the state advised the court that defendant had one prior felony conviction. Id. at 1169. A month after sentencing, the state realized defendant actually had two prior felony convictions on his record, making him ineligible for probation and subject to a mandatory Class X sentence. Id. Thereafter, the state filed a motion to vacate the defendant's guilty plea, claiming the sentence was void. Id. The district court allowed defendant to withdraw his guilty plea, and defendant was subsequently convicted during a bench trial. Id. At sentencing, the trial court sentenced defendant to eight years in prison  and found he was subject to a mandatory Class X sentence. Id.
On appeal, defendant presented the same argument as Jepsen, claiming "that his constitutional right to be free from double jeopardy was violated because he was twice punished for the same offense and was not given credit for the probation he served." Id. at 1173. The Illinois Supreme Court rejected this claim and held that sentencing a defendant to probation, and then to imprisonment for the same offense, was not "an unconstitutional second punishment for double jeopardy purposes." Id. at 1176. Therefore, the court reasoned, the defendant was not entitled to credit for time spent on probation. Id.4 
In reaching this decision, the court noted defendant's proposed interpretation of Pearce—the same interpretation the majority now adopts—"extends the scope of the opinion beyond the facts" since Pearce never addressed the factual scenario presented in Whitfield. Id. at 1174- 75. Moreover, the court explained why probation and imprisonment are different for double jeopardy purposes. The court asserted, "Probation is a substitute for imprisonment" that provides defendants with "an opportunity for reformation, provided the trial court could be satisfied there is reasonable ground to expect both that the defendant will be reformed and that the interests of society will be subserved." Id. at 1176 (quoting People ex rel. Barrett v. Bardens, 394 Ill. 511, 68 N.E.2d 710, 713 (1946)).
Our court is faced with the identical issue faced by the Illinois Supreme Court in Whitfield, and I believe our court should reach the same conclusion. Probation is a form of "clemency," not punishment. Id. at 1176. The liberty restraints experienced on probation are generally much less drastic than those a defendant experiences while imprisoned. To give but one example, police officers in Iowa need a warrant to search the residence of a probationer who enjoys the same privacy rights as any other citizen. See State v. Short, 851 N.W.2d 474, 506 (Iowa 2014). By contrast, correctional officers may freely search an inmate's cell or a resident's room at a residential treatment facility. Nevertheless, the majority tries to equate probation with incarceration for double jeopardy purposes. The majority does this, in part, by noting that Jepsen was subject to liberty restraints under the terms of his probation, including the possible requirement to enter a "Residential Treatment Facility (and follow all rules of said facility and successfully complete the program)," if his probation officer deemed it necessary. The majority goes on to assert that probation is punishment because "[t]he time spent on probation, either within a residential treatment facility or otherwise subject to the conditions and surveillance of the judicial district department of correctional services, cannot be returned to a probationer." In my opinion, this statement misses the mark. Certainly  under the facts of this case, there is nothing to return to the probationer. In exchange for minor and insignificant restraints, Jepsen benefitted by not being placed immediately in prison with what we all agree would have resulted in significant restraints on his liberty interests. Those restraints on his liberty interests were simply not present here.
Despite the discussion of the potential time that Jepsen might have spent in a residential treatment facility, there is nothing in the record to show that Jepsen ever spent time in a residential treatment facility where he might have been subject to the conditions and surveillance of such a facility. If Jepsen had spent time in such a facility, we would be looking at a different situation. See Iowa Code § 907.3(3) (2017) ("[A] person committed to an alternate jail facility or community correctional residential treatment facility who has probation revoked shall be given credit for time served in the facility."); State v. Allensworth, 823 N.W.2d 411, 413 (Iowa 2012) (noting the legislature enacted an amendment to Iowa Code section 907.3(3) in 2012 that limits credit for time on supervised probation to that time spent in an alternate jail facility or community correctional residential treatment facility). Accordingly, the legislature has already enacted legislation to address the potential issue before us here.
More specifically, we should examine Jepsen's liberty interests that were affected when he was placed on probation. The conditions of his probation included completing a cognitive empathy course, maintaining consistent employment, and participating in any rehabilitative programs that his probation officer deemed necessary. Yet the record shows that Jepsen was able to live at home, get married, start a family, and have most of the freedoms that we all enjoy. This would not have been possible if he had been incarcerated or in a residential treatment facility. Moreover, in prison or a residential treatment facility, Jepsen would not have been able to access Facebook and email websites, which ultimately allowed him to create fake accounts to contact girls in order for them to exchange naked photographs with him. Nor would he have had access to the cellphone application, which he used to download, view, and distribute pornographic images of children.
Not only are the liberty restraints drastically different between serving probation in the relative freedom of one's home and serving time in prison, but the purposes and penological justifications for probation and imprisonment differ as well. In Iowa, "[t]he purposes of probation are to provide maximum opportunity for the rehabilitation of the defendant and to protect the community from further offenses by the defendant and others." Iowa Code § 907.7(3); see also State v. Valin, 724 N.W.2d 440, 445-46 & n.4 (Iowa 2006). Thus, the core purposes that probation serves fall within the penological justifications of rehabilitation and deterrence. See State v. Oliver, 812 N.W.2d 636, 646 (Iowa 2012) (explaining legitimate penological justifications).
In contrast, imprisonment serves different penological justifications, as imprisonment is inappropriate "for the purpose of rehabilitating the defendant or providing the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment." Tapia v. United States, 564 U.S. 319, 326-27, 131 S. Ct. 2382, 2388-89, 180 L. Ed. 2d 357 (2011) (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 994(k) (2006)) (noting the U.S. Code instructs courts to acknowledge that imprisonment is an inappropriate method to promote rehabilitation). While the majority correctly notes we have previously held that lifetime parole constitutes  punishment, we only did so where the statute imposing lifetime parole on certain sex offenders imposed it upon the defendant "for the underlying criminal offense without any showing that the offender pose[d] a safety risk." State v. Lathrop, 781 N.W.2d 288, 296-97 (Iowa 2010). Lifetime parole in that context bears no rational similarity to the probation granted to Jepsen. Accordingly, I would find Jepsen was not subjected to an unconstitutional second punishment in violation of his constitutional right to be free from double jeopardy. Thus, in my opinion, Jepsen is not entitled to receive any credit for the time he spent on probation.
This result seems especially compelling under the circumstances before us here. Jepsen received a legal sentence of ten years in prison for one of his offenses. Then, the district court mistakenly placed Jepsen on probation for an offense in which probation was not legally permitted. While this was clearly an illegal sentence, it was not the type of illegal sentence that was detrimental to Jepsen. Rather, the illegality of putting him on probation was a tremendous benefit to him: he did not go to prison for almost five years ago. This is not the type of judicial error that should result in a windfall to Jepsen. In this case, the judicial error gave him the opportunity to live a relatively free life in which he was able to live at home, get married, start a family, and resume the same predatory behaviors he engaged in prior to his conviction.
Finally, it is worth noting how this matter would have been resolved had there been no illegal sentence, one that I have noted benefitted Jepsen greatly. At the same time that the district court was considering its correction of the illegal sentence, there was also a pending application to revoke Jepsen's probation due to the flagrant violations of his terms of probation. Had his probation simply been revoked instead of the court resentencing him due to a judicial error, he unquestionably could have had his original prison sentence imposed as punishment, and there would have been no discussion of whether or how much credit he should receive for the time he spent on probation. See Iowa Code § 908.11(4) ("If the [probation] violation is established, the court may . . . revoke the probation . . . and require the defendant to serve the sentence imposed or any lesser sentence, and, if imposition of sentence was deferred, may impose any sentence which might originally have been imposed.").
Jepsen's constitutional right to be free from double jeopardy was not violated in this case. As such, Jepsen is not entitled to any credit for the time he was allowed to be mistakenly placed on probation. I would affirm the corrected sentencing order of the district court and deny any claim for the ineffective assistance of counsel.

 

