
I join Part II.A of the majority opinion, which correctly affirms the denial of Sarli's motion to suppress on Fourth Amendment grounds. I respectfully dissent from Part II.B, however, because I would find that admission of the detective's testimony about the confidential informant's tip (1) violated the Confrontation Clause and (2) was not harmless error.
  I.
Because I disagree with the majority opinion's harmless error analysis, see infra, I must first address the prior question of whether admission of the challenged testimony violated the Confrontation Clause. It did.
As the majority recounts, Detective Contreras was allowed to testify he received a tip from a confidential informant that "there was a male Hispanic man by the name of Arturo driving a white Avalanche that's [sic] going to be delivering narcotics." Contreras further explained that, according to the tip, "Arturo" would deliver the drugs to a specific location ("a Bill Millers" in "the area of Probandt and Highway 90"). Based on that tip, surveillance was established that led to Sarli's arrest. Sarli's attorney objected repeatedly to Contreras's testimony on Confrontation Clause grounds but was overruled.
Admission of Contreras's testimony violated the Confrontation Clause because it allowed a police officer to recount an inculpatory testimonial statement by a non-testifying witness whom Sarli never had the chance to cross-examine. See Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 68, 124 S. Ct. 1354, 158 L. Ed. 2d 177 (2004); see also, e.g., United States v. Kizzee, 877 F.3d 650 (5th Cir. 2017) (explaining that "police testimony about the content of statements given to them by witnesses are testimonial under Crawford," and that "officers cannot refer to the substance of statements made by a nontestifying witness when they inculpate the defendant") (and collecting decisions). Several sister circuits have correctly held that admission of a confidential informant's inculpatory statement under these circumstances implicates the Confrontation Clause. See, e.g., United States v. Shores, 700 F.3d 366, 374 (8th Cir. 2012) (explaining that "[a] [confidential informant's] statement clearly falls within the type of out-of-court statement categorized as 'testimonial'" for Confrontation Clause purposes); United States v. Lopez-Medina, 596 F.3d 716, 730 (10th Cir. 2010) (same); United States v. Cromer, 389 F.3d 662, 675 (6th Cir. 2004) (explaining that "statements of a confidential informant are testimonial" for Confrontation Clause purposes because "[t]ips provided by confidential informants are knowingly and purposely made to authorities, accuse someone of a crime, and often are used against the accused at trial"); see also 2A Wright, Miller & Marcus, Fed. Prac. & Proc. § 412 ("[S]tatements by a confidential informant . . . are 'testimonial' and therefore subject to exclusion under the Confrontation Clause.").
To be sure, the Confrontation Clause is not implicated when out-of-court statements are offered, not for the truth they assert, but for other purposes—such as to "provide context for [an] investigation or explain 'background' facts," especially "where a defendant challenges the adequacy of an investigation." Kizzee, 877 F.3d at 659 (citing United States v. Smith, 822 F.3d 755, 761 (5th Cir. 2016); United States v. Carrillo, 20 F.3d 617, 619 (5th Cir. 1994); United States v. Castro-Fonseca, 423 F. App'x 351, 353 (5th Cir. 2011)). The government invokes that exception here, claiming testimony about the tip was needed to rebut Sarli's argument that the officers made "rookie mistakes." But Contreras could have explained the circumstances leading to Sarli's arrest without divulging the details from the tip (i.e., Sarli's first name, his ethnicity, his sex, the car he was driving, and the fact that he would be "delivering narcotics" to a specific location). What we have previously said about such statements applies here: "Statements exceeding the limited need to explain an officer's actions can violate the Sixth Amendment," particularly "where a nontestifying witness specifically links a defendant  to the crime[.]" Kizzee, 877 F.3d at 659-60 (citations omitted).
In sum, I would find that admission of Detective Contreras's testimony about the confidential informant's out-of-court statements violated the Confrontation Clause.
II.
The majority opinion recites the correct harmless error standard for cases where evidence is introduced in violation of the Confrontation Clause: "[T]here must be '[no] reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction.'" Maj. Op. at 7 (quoting United States v. Alvarado-Valdez, 521 F.3d 337, 341 (5th Cir. 2008)).1  But the majority concludes the government has met this admittedly "demanding" burden "[f]or one simple reason: The prosecution's case turned on statements made by in-court witnesses and not on any out-of-court statement." Maj. Op. at 8. I respectfully disagree.
First, the majority opinion underestimates how important the inadmissible testimony was to the government's case. The majority states there was "only a small number of fleeting references to out-of-court statements by the confidential informant." Id. at 12. That is mistaken. Far from making "fleeting references" to the tip, the prosecutor featured it as the first point in her opening statement. Immediately after greeting the jury, the prosecutor stated:
This is a very simple case. It occurs when Detective Contreras received information that an individual named Sarli, driving a white Avalanche, was distributing methamphetamine.
And the prosecutor returned to the tip in her rebuttal closing:
The case started as a narcotics investigation. Detective Contreras received information from a confidential informant. Based on that information, what he did was look for an Avalanche, a white Avalanche, which is a vehicle that the person transporting to deliver [sic] the drugs was operating. He identified the person as Arturo.
It is no answer that these references merely established a "chronology of events." Maj. Op. at 12. As already explained, the prosecutor could have easily established what triggered the investigation in purely generic terms (i.e., "This all started because of a tip that led the police to surveil and arrest Sarli."). But the prosecutor did far more: she divulged details from "a nontestifying witness [that] specifically link[ed] [Sarli] to the crime," Kizzee, 877 F.3d at 659-60 (brackets added), in both opening and closing statements.
We have consistently refused to find harmless error where the prosecutor emphasized the inadmissible testimony in closing argument. See Alvarado-Valdez, 521 F.3d at 342 (given "government's insistent reliance on the [challenged] testimony in its closing argument, . . . we cannot say the [Confrontation Clause] error was harmless"); Tirado-Tirado, 563 F.3d at 126 (in light of government's "emphasis" in closing argument on tainted testimony, finding "reasonable possibility that [testimony] might have contributed to [defendant's]  conviction"); Jackson, 636 F.3d at 697 (government put "great importance" on tainted evidence "[i]n both its case in chief and its closing argument" and therefore cannot "conclusively show" evidence did not contribute to conviction); see also, e.g., Foster, 910 F.3d at 821-22 (explaining that "Alvarado-Valdez . . . concluded that the government's significant reliance on inadmissible testimony during closing argument made it impossible for the court to determine if the jury would have convicted based on other testimony or evidence") (citing Alvarado-Valdez, 521 F.3d at 342-43); Kizzee, 877 F.3d at 662 ("The importance of [challenged] testimony to the prosecution's case can be underscored if it is referenced in closing statements."). This case falls squarely in line with those precedents: indeed, here the government emphasized the inadmissible testimony in opening and closing.2  As a result, I "cannot see how the government can conclusively show that the tainted evidence did not contribute to [Sarli's] conviction, because the government's [opening and] closing argument[s] relied on that very evidence." Alvarado-Valdez, 521 F.3d at 342-43.
Second, the majority opinion incorrectly asserts that "the prosecution never drew a connection between the confidential information and Sarli's knowledge that he was carrying drugs." Maj. Op. at 12. To the contrary, in her rebuttal closing the prosecutor (1) brought up the tip ("Detective Contreras received information from a confidential informant."); (2) recounted the inculpatory details ("He identified the person as Arturo. It was to happen on Probandt at the Bill Millers . . . a place . . . notorious for drug dealers"); (3) described Sarli's stop as "consistent with what's been told to the detective before"; and (4) concluded that "[t]hose factors all go to knowledge and the intent to distribute[.]" (emphasis added). Evidently, the prosecutor believed the tip's implicating Sarli was one "factor" proving his knowledge and invited the jury to draw that inference. That explains why she raised the point in rebutting the defense's closing argument that "Sarli didn't know that was drugs, and they didn't show it." I thus disagree with the majority that the prosecutor did not "attempt[ ] to insinuate" that the tip established Sarli's knowledge. Maj. Op. at 11. Moreover, it is speculative to assert, as the majority opinion does, that "nothing in the information provided by the confidential source established that Sarli knew he was transporting methamphetamine."Id. at 10. The detective testified the informant told him about "a male Hispanic man by the name of Arturo driving a white Avalanche that's [sic] going to be delivering narcotics." From that testimony, the jury could have readily inferred Sarli knew he was carrying narcotics. At a minimum, there is a "reasonable possibility" that the out-of-court statement "might have contributed" to Sarli's conviction, meaning the government cannot show harmless error. Alvarado-Valdez, 521 F.3d at 341.
Third, the majority opinion points to in-court testimony separate from the inadmissible testimony from which the jury could have inferred Sarli's knowledge. See Maj. Op. at 9-10 (discussing (1) Sarli's admission he was paid "for the admittedly unusual task of transporting a box of cat litter"; (2) the large quantity of meth; (3) testimony about Sarli's nervous behavior; and (4) testimony that Sarli began "weeping," said he was afraid of going to prison, and claimed his wife was "innocent"). But  the majority asks the wrong question. The question is not whether there was sufficient untainted evidence to convict Sarli, but whether the government "demonstrate[d] beyond a reasonable doubt that the tainted evidence did not contribute to [Sarli's] conviction." Alvarado-Valdez, 521 F.3d at 342 (emphasis and brackets added).3  Our precedents have rejected this "mere sufficiency-of-the-untainted-evidence analysis" in Confrontation Clause cases. Lowery v. Collins, 988 F.2d 1364, 1373 (5th Cir. 1993). For instance, in Alvarado-Valdez—after noting that the prosecution relied on the tainted evidence in its closing—we explained that "[t]here is no way to determine whether the jury would have convicted [the defendant] purely on the basis of [someone else's] testimony or of any of the other evidence," because doing so "would require retrying the case on appeal, at best, or engaging in pure speculation, at worst." Id. at 343.4 
The majority opinion insists that the prosecution "did not need" the substance of the confidential informant's tip to connect Sarli to the crime and that the jury had ample evidence to convict Sarli "independent of" the detective's illicit testimony about the tip. Maj. Op. at 8, 9, 10. Whether or not that is true, it is precisely the kind of analysis our precedents instruct us not to undertake in assessing harm from introduction of testimony in violation of the Confrontation Clause. Instead, "the reviewing court must concentrate on the evidence that violated [the defendant's] confrontation right, not the sufficiency of the evidence remaining after excision of the tainted evidence." Lowery, 988 F.2d at 1373.
In sum, I would find that the Confrontation Clause violation was not harmless and that Sarli is therefore entitled to a new trial.
I respectfully dissent.

 

