
In the classic 1957 movie Twelve Angry Men, Henry Fonda plays Juror #8, the holdout whose relentless focus on the evidence ultimately persuades fellow jurors of the defendant's innocence. His nemesis is Juror #3, played by Lee J. Cobb, who nurses a bias against the defendant, ignores evidence, and browbeats other jurors. But not every holdout juror is Henry Fonda. Some may be Lee J. Cobb. In this case, the district court dismissed Juror #13, finding him more Cobb than Fonda. Our precedent allows the district court to make this decision even if the recalcitrant juror turns out to be the only one standing between the defendant and a guilty verdict. See United States v. Edwards, 303 F.3d 606, 634 (5th Cir. 2002) (noting that "we have previously made clear that hold-out jurors are not immune from dismissal based upon just cause" (citing United States v. Huntress, 956 F.2d 1309, 1312-13 (5th Cir. 1992)).
Appellate judges must defer to the district court's on-the-ground discretion in making these sensitive calls. We have "emphasize[d] that a district court, based on its unique perspective at the scene, is in a far superior position than [we are] to appropriately consider allegations of juror misconduct, both during trial and during deliberations." United States v. Ebron, 683 F.3d 105, 126 (5th Cir. 2012) (quoting United States v. Boone, 458 F.3d 321, 329 (3d Cir. 2006)). Based on that deferential posture, I would find the district court did not abuse its discretion when it dismissed Juror #13. The court made findings sufficient to show good cause for dismissal, and those findings were plausible in light of the record as a whole. Specifically, the court's findings were supported by sworn testimony from the jury foreperson, face-to-face interaction with Juror #13, and facts confirmed by defense counsel.
I respectfully dissent.
I.
As the majority opinion correctly notes, Maj. Op. at 6, a district court may dismiss a juror for good cause even after trial has begun. Fed. R. Crim. P. 23(b)(2)(B). Valid grounds for dismissal include "[a] juror's inability to follow instructions," Ebron, 683 F.3d at 127 (citing Edwards, 303 F.3d at 631), and "a lack of candor." Id.; see also, e.g., United States v. Fryar, 867 F.2d 850, 853 (5th Cir. 1989) (explaining that "[t]he district court has the discretion to excuse an untruthful juror"). The majority also recites the correct standard of review: we review a district court's decision to dismiss a juror for abuse of discretion. Maj. Op. at 6  (citing United States v. Pruett, 681 F.3d 232, 247 (5th Cir. 2012) (per curiam)). "A district court abuses its discretion only when its ruling is based on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence." Ebron, 683 F.3d at 126. "A factual finding is not clearly erroneous as long as it is plausible in light of the record as a whole." Id. at 126-27.
The parties do not dispute that the district court made factual findings in support of dismissing Juror #13 or that, if true, those findings are legally sufficient to show good cause. Instead, the only dispute is whether the findings themselves are supported by the evidence. The proper question before us, then, is not whether the district court's findings are the best conclusions it could have drawn but instead whether those findings are "clearly erroneous." Ebron, 683 F.3d at 126. If the findings are "plausible in light of the record as a whole," there is no clear error and therefore no abuse of discretion. Id. at 126-27.
II.
In dismissing Juror #13, the district court articulated four distinct findings on the record. It found that Juror #13 (1) refused to examine the evidence and participate in deliberations with fellow jurors, (2) attempted to rely on evidence outside the record, (3) indicated bias toward defense counsel, and (4) suffered from health issues, including headaches and a short-term memory problems, that interfered with his ability to deliberate. While the district court primarily relied on the jury foreperson's sworn on-the-record testimony for these findings, the court also drew from its face-to-face interaction with Juror #13 (which the court recounted on the record) and from defense counsel's statements confirming information revealed during voir dire.
With respect to Juror #13's bias and refusal to deliberate, the foreperson testified that Juror #13 failed to follow instructions by refusing to consider the evidence and by relying on outside evidence. According to the foreperson, several jurors reminded Juror #13 that the group "needed to use the evidence to come to a conclusion," but Juror #13 "was adamant about not looking at the evidence" and "just kept dismissing it." The foreperson stated that during the "intense" deliberations no one had threatened Juror #13, but that Juror #13 had caused other jurors to become frustrated and cry based on his refusal to follow the court's instructions to consider the evidence. See, e.g., United States v. Fattah, 914 F.3d 112, 149 (3d Cir. 2019) (explaining that good cause for dismissal exists under Rule 23(b) "where a juror refuses to apply the law, refuses to follow the court's instructions, refuses to deliberate with his or her fellow jurors, or demonstrates bias") (citations omitted).
The foreperson also stated that Juror #13 had penned a note saying "Perez"—the defendant's counsel—was "number one . . . what else is there." The court connected this back to voir dire when Juror #13 had admitted knowing Perez. According to the court, the voir dire admission took place off the record during a bench discussion, and nothing suggests the foreperson knew about it. After the court heard the foreperson's testimony about the note, Perez confirmed on the record that he knew Juror #13 along with his wife and son and that they had a connection from a prior criminal case. Even though during voir dire Juror #13 had professed an ability to remain unbiased, the new evidence about the note undermined that claim and supported the court's finding that Juror #13 had a pro-defense bias. See, e.g., United States v. Thomas, 116 F.3d 606, 613 (2d Cir. 1997) (noting that "Rule 23(b) dismissals have been upheld repeatedly in cases  where the trial court found that a juror was no longer capable of rendering an impartial verdict" because, inter alia, a juror was "discovered to have a relationship with one of the parties") (and collecting decisions); cf. Brooks v. Dretke, 444 F.3d 328, 329-30 & n.11 (5th Cir. 2006) (surveying Supreme Court and circuit law on jurors' "implied bias").
In addition, Juror #13 complained directly to the district court about his health problems and was unable to deliberate on the first day due to these complications. He indicated that "he suffered from various medical problems," that he was "disabled," and that "he suffered from headaches" during which "he would generally like to go to sleep and take a nap." He also stated that he suffered from "short-term memory," which the district court interpreted to mean short-term memory loss. The foreperson confirmed that Juror #13's health-related complaints were a problem during deliberations, as they hindered Juror #13's ability to understand the proceedings. See, e.g., Huntress, 956 F.2d at 1312 (observing "it is within the trial judge's sound discretion to remove a juror whenever the judge becomes convinced that the juror's abilities to perform his duties become impaired") (quoting United States v. Dominguez, 615 F.2d 1093, 1095 (5th Cir. 1980) (cleaned up)).
Although the district court did not interview Juror #13 on the record, the court did have a one-on-one interaction with him when he claimed that other jurors were harassing him. Based on that interaction, the court concluded that it "did not believe" Juror #13 was "credible." In virtue of its "unique perspective at the scene," the district court was in a "far superior position" to draw such conclusions. Ebron, 683 F.3d at 126 (citation and quotation marks omitted).
At the very least, this record shows that the district court's findings about Juror #13 were plausible. Therefore, the district court did not abuse its discretion in dismissing Juror #13.
III.
In finding otherwise, the majority opinion errs in three ways. First, the majority advances a minimum investigatory threshold for juror misconduct not found in our law. Second, the majority incorrectly asserts that the district court refused to conduct any investigation. Finally, the majority misapplies the standard of review.
The majority opinion begins by stating that "[w]hile the scope of an investigation into juror misconduct is within the discretion of the district court, the applicable authority requires that there be an investigation." Maj. Op. at 8. Since there plainly was an investigation, see infra, the majority can only be suggesting that the failure to clear a certain investigatory threshold—namely, interviewing other jurors and Juror #13 himself—fatally compromises the court's findings. For this proposition, the majority cites four cases: Patel, Virgen-Moreno, Fryar, and Ebron. All are distinguishable, and none sets a standard for what kind of investigation a court must perform before making findings related to juror dismissal. To the contrary, our cases have long held, without qualification, that "the scope of an investigation into juror misconduct rests with the court's discretion." Fryar, 867 F.2d at 854 (citing Tillman v. United States, 406 F.2d 930, 938 (5th Cir. 1969)).
In Patel, an unpublished opinion, the district court conducted an extensive investigation before dismissing a juror for failing to follow the court's instructions. 485 F. App'x 702, 712 (5th Cir. 2012). The investigation included interviewing each juror using prearranged questions agreed  upon by both parties. Id. at 712-13. But while the district court's method of investigation may have been admirable—and, in our words affirming the dismissal, "wise"—we did not suggest that such an investigation is required in every case. Id. at 713. To the contrary, Patel affirmed that district courts "enjoy wide discretion to determine the proper scope of an investigation into whether just cause to dismiss exists." Id. at 712 (quoting Edwards, 303 F.3d at 631). Moreover, the appellant in Patel did not argue that there should have been a more thorough investigation; he argued that the investigation went too far and that questioning every juror was unjustified. Id. We held only that the investigation did not exceed the ceiling for such matters, not that it represented the floor. As a result, it is hard to see how Patel helps the majority.
Virgen-Moreno is similarly unhelpful. In that case, the district court conducted no investigation other than reading a note from a juror who asked to be excused because she was having trouble concentrating. 265 F.3d 276, 287 (5th Cir. 2001). The district court made no attempt to verify the note by speaking with the juror, nor did the court consult with any other jurors, under oath or otherwise. Id. We affirmed the dismissal, recognizing that the reasons offered in the juror's note "were sufficient factual support for the district court's decision." Id. at 288. Thus, Virgen-Moreno also fails to support the majority opinion and particularly its notion that the district court here was obligated to corroborate the sworn testimony of a jury foreperson.
Fryar, too, is inapplicable. The precise issue there was not whether a juror had been wrongfully dismissed but whether the circumstances of the dismissal prejudiced the remaining jurors against the defendant (who, ironically, was on trial for jury tampering). 867 F.2d at 853-54. Despite evenly split testimony from the other jurors, the district court concluded that a particular juror's story about being approached during sequestration was false. Id. at 852. The district court dismissed the juror for lying, but—after checking with the other jurors to confirm they could still be impartial—allowed the trial to proceed. Id. The defendant later moved for a new trial, arguing that the dismissed juror's story was true and presenting corroborating evidence. Id. at 853. The district court denied the motion, and we affirmed. Id. at 855. We recognized that "the scope of an investigation into jury misconduct is within the district court's discretion," id. at 854, but said nothing about the investigatory threshold in cases where a juror refuses to participate in deliberations.
While closer factually to this case, Ebron actually undermines the majority's position. In that case, which involved a deadlocked jury in a murder trial, the district court interviewed all the jurors after the foreperson alleged that one juror had made comments displaying a bias in favor of defense counsel.1  683 F.3d at 123. But like Patel, the issue in Ebron was whether the district court went too far in interviewing all the jurors. Id. at 125. We held only that "[s]uch an investigation may be conducted via careful juror questioning or any other appropriate means" but never suggested that questioning every juror was obligatory. Id. (emphases added). To the contrary, we cautioned that a court's investigation of juror misconduct must balance "[p]reserving the secrecy of jury deliberations" on the one hand against ensuring  "juror compliance with instructions" on the other. Id. at 125. Accordingly, we warned that district courts "'should be more cautious in investigating juror misconduct during deliberations than during trial, and should be exceedingly careful to avoid any disclosure of the content of deliberations.'" Id. (quoting Boone, 458 F.3d at 329). Ebron's nuanced advice to district courts is incompatible with the majority's view that the court was obligated to conduct a more searching investigation of Juror #13.
In a footnote, the majority mentions our recent decision in United States v. Hodge, a civil case involving a similar standard for juror dismissal. 933 F.3d 468, 480 (5th Cir. 2019). Maj. Op. at 8 n.3. In Hodge, the foreperson testified about an obstinate and threatening juror without revealing the juror's identity. An earlier jury note had described one holdout juror who donned earplugs and refused to deliberate. Id. at 479. The district court responded by interviewing all the jurors one-by-one under oath. Id. at 480. When the court finally reached Juror #7, that juror denied threatening anyone but admitted wearing earplugs. Id. The court dismissed Juror #7, noting it "did not believe he was telling the truth." Id. at 481. The court found "credible evidence the juror had not participated in the deliberations and that 'he threatened at least one fellow juror,'" and we affirmed. Id. at 480-81 (citing Ebron, 683 F.3d at 125-28). But critically, like the previous cases, we never suggested that interviewing all jurors is mandatory. Also, the juror interviews in Hodge did little to corroborate the foreperson's testimony and primarily served to identify the offending juror. Here, unlike in Hodge, there was never any doubt as to which juror was refusing to deliberate. The district court, the lawyers, and the foreperson all identified him as Juror #13—there was no need to ferret out his identity.
At most, the cases cited by the majority for its investigatory threshold requirement show that a more intrusive investigation, such as interviewing jurors one-by-one under oath, may sometimes be warranted—taking account of the need to protect the secrecy of jury deliberations. No one disputes that point. But what the cases fail to show is that a district court must interview jurors one-by-one under oath before dismissing a juror for good cause.
Second, the majority errs by concluding that the district court "refuse[d] to conduct any investigation" and made its decision with "no factual support." Maj. Op. at 11, 12. As discussed above in Part II, the district court did investigate the matter and did have factual support for its findings. The court swore in the jury foreperson to testify on the record and allowed the lawyers on both sides to question the foreperson as they saw fit. The court also solicited information from Perez, Ramos's counsel, in order to corroborate the bias suggested by Juror #13's note. While the court declined to conduct the sort of investigation requested by Ramos—i.e., a separate evidentiary hearing—it cannot be said that the court refused to conduct any investigation whatsoever. And the majority's assertion that there was "no evidence that Juror 13 had a pro-defense bias or that he refused to consider the evidence and deliberate" is mistaken. Maj. Op. at 11. The foreperson testified to these facts under oath, and Ramos's counsel corroborated that Juror #13 previously knew him.
Third, while the majority opinion correctly articulates our well-established standard of review for juror dismissal, it misapplies that standard. The only question before us is whether the court's findings are clearly erroneous—and "'[a] factual finding is not clearly erroneous as long as it is plausible in light of the record as a whole.'" Ebron, 683 F.3d at 126-27 (quoting  United States v. Jacquinot, 258 F.3d 423, 427 (5th Cir. 2001)). The majority does not explain what makes the court's findings about Juror #13 implausible in light of the entire record. The majority instead faults the district court for not performing a more thorough investigation. But that alone does not establish that the court's findings, based on the investigation it did undertake, were "implausible"—especially in light of the deference we must give to trial judges in determining the credibility of witnesses in their own courtrooms. Ebron, 683 F.3d at 126.
If we were in the district judge's shoes, perhaps we would have done things differently. That is not our role here, however. The sole question before us is whether the district court's findings were plausible in light of the record as a whole. In light of the foreperson's sworn testimony, the district court's face-to-face interaction with Juror #13, and the facts revealed by defense counsel and at voir dire, I cannot find that the district court's factual findings were implausible. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.

 

