, concurring in part and dissenting in part. In qualified immunity cases, our ultimate inquiry is not whether the officers in question acted reasonably; it is instead whether existing law established "beyond debate" that they acted unreasonably. City of Escondido v. Emmons, 139 S. Ct. 500, 504, 202 L. Ed. 2d 455 (2019) (per curiam) (quoting District of Columbia v. Wesby, 138 S. Ct. 577, 581, 199 L. Ed. 2d 453 (2018)). And although we must construe the facts in the light most favorable to Graves, the objective reasonableness of the officers' actions is "a pure question of law" that is for the court to decide, not a jury. Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 381 n.8, 127 S. Ct. 1769, 167 L. Ed. 2d 686 (2007). Applying these principles, I agree with the majority that Hedger is entitled to qualified immunity for Graves' claims that he is liable for supervising an unconstitutional use of force and failure to protect.
I disagree, however, with the majority opinion's denial of qualified immunity to the three officers for their uses of force. Even under the version of the facts most favorable to Graves, it is clear that Myers and Potratz perceived that Graves was brandishing a dangerous weapon when he was only six to eight feet away from Myers. No existing precedent establishes that the use of lethal force under these circumstances is excessive; they are therefore entitled to qualified immunity. Hedger is also entitled to qualified immunity for his use of a taser. In his case, not only is there no controlling authority that "squarely governs the specific facts at issue," Emmons, 139 S. Ct. at 503, but binding circuit precedent affirmatively establishes that an officer who uses a taser—and even lethal force—in analogous circumstances is entitled to qualified immunity. I therefore join Part II.1 of the majority opinion and respectfully dissent from Parts II.2 and II.3.
I.
Qualified "immunity protects all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly  violate the law." Kisela v. Hughes, 138 S. Ct. 1148, 1152, 200 L. Ed. 2d 449 (2018) (quoting White v. Pauly, 137 S. Ct. 548, 551, 196 L. Ed. 2d 463 (2017) (per curiam)). It "attaches when an official's conduct does not violate clearly established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have known." Emmons, 139 S. Ct. at 503 (quoting Kisela, 138 S. Ct. at 1152). "An officer 'cannot be said to have violated a clearly established right unless the right's contours were sufficiently definite that any reasonable official in the defendant's shoes would have understood that he was violating it.'" Kisela, 138 S. Ct. at 1153 (quoting Plumhoff v. Rickard, 572 U.S. 765, 778-79, 134 S. Ct. 2012, 188 L. Ed. 2d 1056 (2014)).
Defining clearly established rights with specificity "is particularly important in excessive force cases," since "the result depends very much on the facts of each case." Emmons, 139 S. Ct. at 503 (quoting Kisela, 138 S. Ct. at 1153). "[G]eneral rules" cannot provide officers with sufficiently clear warning "outside an 'obvious case.'" Kisela, 138 S. Ct. at 1153 (quoting White, 137 S. Ct. at 552); see also Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590 (noting that such "obvious case[s]" are "rare"). Instead, "police officers are entitled to qualified immunity unless existing precedent squarely governs the specific facts at issue." Emmons, 139 S. Ct. at 503 (quoting Kisela, 138 S. Ct. at 1153). Existing precedent cannot squarely govern unless there is "controlling authority" or "a robust 'consensus of cases of persuasive authority'" addressing the question. Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, 563 U.S. 731, 742, 131 S. Ct. 2074, 179 L. Ed. 2d 1149 (2011) (quoting Wilson v. Layne, 526 U.S. 603, 617, 119 S. Ct. 1692, 143 L. Ed. 2d 818 (1999)); accord Latits v. Phillips, 878 F.3d 541, 552 (6th Cir. 2017).
Because this case arises on summary judgment, we must "construe all of the facts in the record 'in the light most favorable' to" Graves as the nonmoving party. Schreiber v. Moe, 596 F.3d 323, 332 (6th Cir. 2010) (quoting Champion v. Outlook Nashville, Inc., 380 F.3d 893, 901 (6th Cir. 2004)). "Once we have done so," however, "'the question whether [the officers'] actions were objectively unreasonable is a pure question of law'" that is for us, not a jury, to decide. Id. (quoting Chappell v. City of Cleveland, 585 F.3d 901, 909 (6th Cir.2009)). Moreover, because this is a matter of qualified immunity, our ultimate inquiry is not whether the officers' perceptions and actions were reasonable but whether it is "beyond debate" that they were reasonable. See Emmons, 139 S. Ct. at 504 (quoting Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 581).
II.
The majority does not claim that Myers and Potratz would have violated a clearly established right if they had reason to believe that Graves was holding a gun, knife, or other dangerous weapon when they fired at him. Nor could it—if the officers had reason to believe that Graves was holding a dangerous weapon, they are surely entitled to qualified immunity. The majority instead claims that, under the interpretation of the facts most favorable to Graves, all reasonable officers in Myers' and Potratz's position would have known that the object in Graves' hand was harmless. The record, however, just does not bear this conclusion out.
Myers. Seconds after the shooting took place, Myers told his fellow officers, "He had a gun whatever it was." Police Video Transcript, R. 30-15, PageID 1416. While Hedger was still searching Graves for the object that was in his hand, Myers reiterated, "It's a small handgun, right hand." Id. at PageID 1417. After Graves had been  secured and Hedger confirmed that the object was a knife handle, Myers said, "Black is what I saw, black and coming right at me. . . . I could have swore it was just a little like a Derringer almost. What it came across as." Id. at PageID 1419-20. Myers reiterated that he had believed the object in Graves' hand was a gun at his deposition testimony. He testified, "From behind his back [Graves] came at me with a—what I perceived as a handgun, it was black handled with silver glint to the front of it." Myers Dep., R. 30-10, PageID 1258; accord id. at PageID 1261 ("He took his right hand from behind his back and raised a black handled metal object with metal towards the front of it at me as if he was pointing a pistol directly at my head. . . . I believed it was a gun, yes, sir. . . . I believed it was a gun, sir.").
The majority offers three reasons why a jury might not credit Myers' statements: "the object in Graves's hand was not a gun," the object "bore little likeness to a gun," and "Myers himself testified that he had no reason to believe the object was a gun." Maj. Op. at 12. None of these reasons withstands scrutiny.
The majority's third claim is plainly not true. Myers testified that he believed the object in Graves' hand was a gun and explained his reason for this belief: it looked like a gun in that it appeared to be "a black handled metal object with metal towards the front of it." The majority relies on an earlier statement in Myers' deposition where Graves' attorney asked Myers, "And you had no reason to believe he had a gun?" Myers responded, "I had no knowledge that he had one, that's correct." Myers Dep., R. 30-10, PageID 1257. Myers made this statement in the context of a series of questions about his intent in approaching the bathroom and moving a chair that obstructed his path in the hallway. Myers had not yet discussed the object in Graves' hand or what he perceived it to be. Instead Myers was testifying that at the time he approached the bathroom, but before he saw the object in Graves' hand, he had no reason to believe Graves had a gun:
Q. And it was your intent to talk him out?
A. That is correct.
Q. Negotiate him out of there?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And I take it to be safe—you were concerned he might have a weapon?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. You had heard about a knife?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. So you were concerned he might have a knife?
A. I was concerned he might have a weapon, yes, sir.
Q. Okay. You hadn't heard anything about guns?
A. That's correct.
Q. Okay. And you had no reason to believe he had a gun?
A. I had no knowledge that he had one. That's correct.
. . .
Q. And you fall. . . . And then as you fell what happened next?
A. From behind his back he came at me with a—what I perceived as a handgun, it was black handled with silver glint to the front of it.
Id. at PageID 1256-58. Myers therefore never contradicted his own statements that he believed Graves was holding a gun.
That the object in Graves' hand was not in fact a gun cannot on its own be a sufficient basis for a jury to conclude that Myers did not believe Graves had a gun or for the court to conclude that Myers was clearly unreasonable for believing Graves had a gun. If that were so, we would have  to deny qualified immunity in every case in which police officers used lethal force against a suspect who turned out to be unarmed. That would be contrary to our caselaw. See, e.g., Mullins v. Cyranek, 805 F.3d 760, 768-69 (6th Cir. 2015); Pollard v. City of Columbus, 780 F.3d 395, 403 (6th Cir. 2015). Instead, Myers is entitled to qualified immunity if it is at least debatable that he "had probable cause to believe [Graves] posed a serious threat." Pollard, 780 F.3d at 403.
That leaves the majority's contention that the object in Graves' hand "bore little likeness to a gun." What object does the majority have in mind when it makes this claim? Does it mean the bladeless handle of the knife Graves used to stab his grandmother or the comb Graves claimed to be holding? Although the majority is not explicit, the factual record and proceedings below make clear that the object can only be the knife handle. Graves admitted before the district court that the object in his hand was "the black plastic broken handle of the knife whose blade his grandmother had broken off." Response to Motion for Summary Judgment, R. 30, PageID 454. He expressly stated that this point was "not disputed." Id.
Despite this concession, the majority nevertheless finds that the "record is not clear as to what the item was." Maj. Op. at 5. But even if we were to overlook Graves' express concession of this point, no genuine dispute of fact exists. Although Graves believed that he was holding a comb, it is undisputed that he was hallucinating at the time, and as Graves' counsel admitted at oral argument, the only object found in the bathtub was the knife handle. Since Graves' testimony "is blatantly contradicted by the record, so that no reasonable jury could believe it," we "should not adopt that version of the facts for purposes of ruling on a motion for summary judgment." Scott, 550 U.S. at 380.
A photograph of the knife handle is in the record. R. 30-25, PageID 1785. The photo reveals that the knife handle is black with metal rivets of a silver color along the side. Id. The physical evidence thus provides no basis for a reasonable jury to disbelieve Myers' testimony that he saw Graves lift up a black-handled object with a silver glint and that he inferred from this perception that the object was a gun. See Chappell, 585 F.3d at 910 (accepting as true at the summary judgment stage officers' testimony as to their perceptions and subjective beliefs because the testimony was not "refuted by physical or circumstantial evidence" or "disputed by contrary testimony").
Whether it was reasonable for Myers to make this inference is of course a "pure question of law," not a jury question. Scott, 550 U.S. at 381 n.8; Schreiber, 596 F.3d at 332. The majority concludes that it is beyond debate that Myers' inference was unreasonable because the object in Graves' hand bore little resemblance to a gun and because, on the view of the facts most favorable to Graves, Myers was standing upright from six to eight feet away with "a clear line of sight to the object" when he fired. Maj. Op. at 13. I do not see how the majority can arrive at this conclusion. Even if he were standing upright with a clear line of sight, Myers still had only a fraction of a second to determine whether the black object with a silver metallic glint that Graves had suddenly lifted into the air was a gun. A bladeless knife handle is an unusual object; it is not the sort of thing that can easily be recognized in an instant when it suddenly and unexpectedly comes into view. And if the knife handle had actually been a gun, an extra moment's hesitation could have been lethal. I am certainly not in a position  to say that Myers' inference in the heat of the moment was unreasonable, let alone that every reasonable officer in Myers' position would have known the object was not a gun. But that is the standard the law requires to deny Myers qualified immunity. Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590.
Our precedents have repeatedly warned that "[t]he 'reasonableness' of a particular use of force must be judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene, rather than with the 20/20 vision of hindsight." Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 396, 109 S. Ct. 1865, 104 L. Ed. 2d 443 (1989). "What constitutes 'reasonable' action may seem quite different to someone facing a possible assailant than to someone analyzing the question at leisure." Boyd v. Baeppler, 215 F.3d 594, 602 (6th Cir. 2000) (quoting Smith v. Freland, 954 F.2d 343, 347 (6th Cir. 1992)). We must not substitute our "own personal notions—about what might have been, could have been, or should have been—in a 'sanitized world of . . . imagination' quite unlike the dangerous and complex world where [Myers was] required to make an instantaneous decision." Chappell, 585 F.3d at 912 (first alteration in original) (quoting Boyd, 215 F.3d at 602). "Rather, we must adopt a 'built-in measure of deference to the officer's on-the-spot judgment about the level of force necessary in light of the circumstances of the particular case.'" Mullins, 805 F.3d at 766 (quoting Burchett v. Kiefer, 310 F.3d 937, 944 (6th Cir. 2002)). If the majority's conclusion that it was clearly unreasonable for Myers to believe that Graves had a gun because he should have been able to see better is not an improper substitution of hindsight for an officer's on-the-spot judgment, what is?
The majority identifies no case where we have held, on similar facts, that an officer's belief that a suspect was holding a gun was unreasonable. This is no surprise, because we have never expected officers to adhere to such an exacting standard for distinguishing guns from objects that merely look like guns within a fraction of a second. Instead, we have held, for instance, that officers had probable cause to believe that a suspect was holding a gun when he merely "clasped his hands in a shooting posture." Pollard, 780 F.3d at 400. If an officer on the scene can have probable cause to perceive a threat when a suspect's bare hands are clasped together as if they were a gun, he surely has probable cause when a suspect suddenly pulls out a black-handled object with a silver metal glint. Accordingly, even construing the facts in the light most favorable to Graves, it is "at least arguable," Reichle v. Howards, 566 U.S. 658, 669, 132 S. Ct. 2088, 182 L. Ed. 2d 985 (2012), that an officer in Myers' position would have reason to believe that Graves posed an imminent threat to his life and safety. I would therefore hold that he is entitled to qualified immunity.
Potratz. In the immediate aftermath of the shooting, Potratz told the other officers that he believed Graves was holding a gun. Police Video Transcript, R. 30-15, PageID 1416, 1419. He also said to Myers, "I—he was coming right at you, I had to shoot him. He was coming right at you." Id. at PageID 1420. At his deposition, however, Potratz testified that at the moment he fired his weapon he did not "think [Graves] had a gun." Potratz Dep., R. 30-8, PageID 1033. Instead, he stated that "[a]t the time with the item that he was coming up with, it appeared to be a knife to me." Id. In response to follow-up questions, he repeated that he believed the object in Graves' hand to be "a weapon" without specifying further. Id. at PageID 1039. Potratz further testified that he shot Graves because "I thought he was going to injure my partner [Myers]." Id. at PageID 1038.
 Potratz clearly contradicted himself on the point of whether he believed Graves was holding a gun; thus, a reasonable jury could certainly conclude that Potratz did not believe that Graves had a gun. Potratz nevertheless consistently stated that he believed Graves was holding a weapon of some kind that posed a threat to Myers and that he fired at Graves to protect Myers. There is no basis in the record for a jury to conclude that Potratz could see that the object in Graves' hand was harmless, and it would be pure speculation to conclude that Potratz knew that Graves was holding a bladeless knife handle. Construing the facts in the light most favorable to Graves, we must assume that Potratz either believed the object in Graves' hand was only a knife or believed the object was a weapon of some kind without having a good sense of what exactly the object was, and we must assume that Potratz believed that, whatever weapon he had, Graves posed a serious threat to Myers' safety.
The majority concludes that a jury could find that Potratz did not believe that Graves had anything genuinely dangerous in his hand. This is so, according to the majority, for two reasons. First, the majority claims, Potratz admitted that at the moment he fired his gun he did not believe the object in Graves' hand was a knife. Indeed, he only believed the object to have been a knife in hindsight, because someone had told him about the knife handle found in the tub after the fact. Second, the majority believes Potratz suggested in his deposition that he would have shot Graves even if Graves had "been holding any object at all." Maj. Op. at 13. As was the case with Myers, these findings stem from a misreading of Potratz's deposition testimony. For its first point, the majority relies on a portion of the deposition where Potratz was asked, "My question is did you see a knife with a blade, yes or no?" Potratz responded, "No." Potratz Dep., R. 30-8, PageID 1033. The majority overlooks, however, that in context Potratz was testifying that even though he perceived the object in Graves' hand to be a knife, the object was not in fact a knife:
Q. Okay. Did you see a knife?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you see a blade of a knife—strike that. Did you see a knife with a blade?
A. At the time with the item that he was coming up with, it appeared to be a knife to me.
Q. I didn't ask what you what it appeared at the time. Did you see a knife?
MR. FIELD [Potratz's attorney]: He just testified to what he saw.
MR. PALMER [Graves' attorney]: He testified to what he saw but he didn't answer my question.
BY MR. PALMER:
Q. My question is did you see a knife with a blade, yes or no?
A. No.
Id. Similarly, Potratz never testified that he only believed the object in Graves' hand was a knife after the fact. In the above-quoted passage, he testified that he believed the object was a knife at the time he fired. He was later asked why he had come to believe, by the time of his deposition, that the object was a bladeless knife handle. Potratz responded that he was told after the fact:
Q. Okay. And the only reason you believe it's a knife handle was because someone told you they found these knife handles around, correct?
A. Sitting here today?
Q. Yeah.
A. Fair to say.
 Id. at PageID 1044. There is therefore no basis in the record for concluding that Potratz could see that the object in Graves' hand was not a knife at the moment that he fired.
As to the majority's second point, Potratz testified that he did not think it was fair to say that he had shot an unarmed man. See id. at 1045 ("Q. Okay. You know as we sit here today that you shot an individual who didn't have a weapon in his hand and you shot him in the face; that's a fair statement, correct? A. No, because anything could be a weapon."). But Potratz never claims that he would have still shot Graves if he had known that the object was just the bladeless handle of a knife, let alone "any object at all." The majority's conclusion only follows if we can attribute to Potratz the premise that it is always acceptable to shoot a suspect who has any weapon, but Potratz never made a statement of that sort. In any event, our inquiry is not whether Potratz would have acted unreasonably if he had perceived something different, but whether he in fact acted unreasonably in light of what he actually perceived.
We have never held that an officer must identify the kind of weapon a suspect is brandishing with specificity before he can have probable cause to conclude that the suspect poses an immediate, serious threat to others. Instead we look to "the totality of the circumstances" to see whether an officer's use of force was reasonable—or at least debatably reasonable. Reich v. City of Elizabethtown, 945 F.3d 968, 978 (6th Cir. 2019). It is undisputed that Graves had stabbed his grandmother in the head not forty minutes prior and that Potratz could not see Graves' hands until he suddenly lifted the knife handle into the air. It is also undisputed, although the majority makes no mention of it, that Graves brandished the knife handle in a threatening manner. Graves himself testified that he lifted up the knife handle (which he believed to be a comb) in order "to scare" the officers. Graves Dep., R. 30-24, PageID 1743. Graves also agreed that he "point[ed] the comb at them like it was a knife." Id. at PageID 1754. Myers was only six to eight feet away from Graves. Under these circumstances, it was at least arguably reasonable for Potratz to conclude that Graves was brandishing a dangerous weapon that he could use to strike and harm Myers, even if he could not identify with precision what kind of weapon Graves appeared to be holding.
As with Myers, the majority identifies no case where we have similarly second-guessed the reasonableness of an officer's belief that a suspect was brandishing a dangerous weapon. Although the majority relies on Sample v. Bailey, that case is inapposite because there the plaintiff's "hands were visible and empty." 409 F.3d 689, 697 (6th Cir. 2005). The plaintiff in Bailey never brandished any object in an effort to scare off the officers who eventually shot him. Id.
Because it is at least debatable that Potratz had reason to believe Graves was brandishing a dangerous weapon, he is entitled to qualified immunity. Myers was only six to eight feet away from Graves at the moment Graves sought to scare the officers off by lifting up the knife handle. Even though Graves would have had to get up out of the bathtub to reach Myers, it would not violate clearly established law for Potratz to conclude that Graves posed an imminent threat to Myers' safety. "There is no rule that officers must wait until a suspect is literally within striking range, risking their own and others' lives, before resorting to deadly force." Reich, 945 F.3d at 982. We have upheld qualified immunity for officers who used lethal force against knife-wielding suspects who were  either much farther away or impeded by a more significant obstacle. See id. at 981 (suspect twenty-five to thirty-six feet away); Stevens-Rucker v. City of Columbus, 739 F. App'x 834, 837, 841-42 (6th Cir. 2018) (suspect six to eight feet away with a fence between the officer and the suspect). Accordingly, I would hold that Potratz is entitled to qualified immunity as well.
III.
Hedger's use of a taser is not a close question. The majority fails to appreciate the level of danger that a reasonable officer in Hedger's position could have perceived. It then defines the clearly established rights at issue too abstractly and improperly applies 20/20 hindsight to Hedger's decisionmaking. This leads to an outcome contrary to binding circuit precedent.
Hedger could not see Graves at the moment of the shooting or in the few seconds immediately preceding it because he was standing in the hallway two feet behind Myers. He saw Myers fall and initially believed that Myers had been shot. Myers then shouted, "Not hit. Not hit. Shots fired." Police Video Transcript, R. 30-15, PageID 1415. As the majority notes, Myers' statement that he was "not hit" made clear that he had not been harmed, but as Graves' counsel admitted at oral argument, the statement naturally gives rise to the inference that someone had shot at Myers and missed. Thus, although he knew that Myers was unharmed, Hedger still had reason to believe that Graves had a gun and had fired it. Considering the Graham factors, Hedger reasonably could have believed that Graves (1) had attempted homicide, (2) posed an imminent threat to the lives of the officers under Hedger's command, and (3) was resisting arrest with lethal force. See 490 U.S. at 396. Use of a taser would undoubtedly be proportionate under these circumstances.
The majority asserts that we ought not to take into account the inference Hedger could naturally make from Myers' statement that he was not hit because "there is no record basis to conclude that Myers was not referring to the discharge of his own weapon." Maj. Op. at 18. But what Myers subjectively sought to communicate is irrelevant to our inquiry. The question we must answer is whether it would be reasonable for an officer in Hedger's position to infer that Graves had shot at Myers. Again, "[t]he reasonableness of officer conduct in excessive-force cases is a question for the court," McKenna v. Edgell, 617 F.3d 432, 441 (6th Cir. 2010), that in the qualified-immunity context requires us to defer to the officer's decision unless it is beyond debate that the decision was unreasonable. It is not a question for the jury that we must construe in the light most favorable to Graves.
Once Hedger turned into the bathroom and saw that Graves' face had been injured, the question becomes whether it is beyond debate that any reasonable officer in Hedger's position would have realized that his initial belief that Graves had a gun was mistaken or that any threat from Graves had abated. Hedger knew Graves had been shot when he saw him, but this fact does not negate probable cause to believe Graves had a gun. There were multiple gunshots, and it is entirely plausible that if Graves had fired, Potratz, who was covering Graves with a rifle, would fire in return. Moreover, Myers' statement—"Not hit. Not hit. Shots fired."—which Hedger had just a few seconds to process, reasonably implied that Myers had been the target. According to Hedger's testimony, he could not see Graves' hands and was not able to confirm that there was no gun until he got very close to  the bathtub, after tasering Graves. A reasonable officer in his position could therefore still believe that Graves had a gun, and was capable of firing it, even after seeing his maimed face. Even if some reasonable officers in Hedger's situation might have believed otherwise, officers "will not be liable for mere mistakes in judgment." Butz v. Economou, 438 U.S. 478, 507, 98 S. Ct. 2894, 57 L. Ed. 2d 895 (1978).
It is not clear that a suspect who possesses a firearm poses no threat just because he has been seriously wounded. And, in any event, our precedent has granted qualified immunity to an officer who used a taser in similar circumstances. In Russo v. City of Cincinnati, officers shot a suspect who had come toward them with a knife several times. 953 F.2d 1036, 1040 (6th Cir. 1992). The suspect fell down six or seven steps, id., and then an officer tasered him "while he lay at the bottom of the stairwell," id. at 1045. We held that the officer was entitled to qualified immunity even though "at this point [the suspect] posed no immediate threat to the officers." Id. Just a few seconds earlier, the suspect had posed an imminent threat to the safety of the officers, and the officer's use of his taser was "intended to avoid having to resort to lethal force." Id. Hedger likewise used his taser with the intention of subduing Graves without the use of lethal force. Hedger is, if anything, more clearly entitled to qualified immunity than the officer in Russo. The suspect in Russo was clearly armed only with a knife, whereas Hedger had reason to believe Graves was armed with a gun. And Hedger only tasered Graves once, but the officer in Russo tasered the suspect multiple times. Id. Hedger is therefore entitled to qualified immunity under Russo.
Russo holds that an officer is entitled to qualified immunity when he uses nonlethal force in an effort to deescalate a situation where seconds prior he reasonably believed a suspect posed a lethal threat, even if, in hindsight, the suspect no longer posed a threat. The majority reads Russo to apply only where "but for the use of a taser," a suspect would be "expected to continue resisting in a manner that would have justified the later use of lethal force." Maj. Op. at 17. But the majority fails to identify any respect in which the officer in Russo had more reason to believe that there was a continuing threat than Hedger did. The majority identifies one fact that supposedly distinguishes the present case from Russo—"lethal force had already been applied against Graves—twice—at the time Hedger deployed his taser." Id. But this is also true of Russo; at the moment he was tasered, the suspect in Russo had already been shot "several times" and had fallen down a flight of stairs. 953 F.2d at 1040. Even as the majority reads the case, Russo establishes that Hedger is entitled to qualified immunity.
Furthermore, we have held that officers who used even lethal force under similar circumstances were entitled to qualified immunity. As shown above, when Hedger heard the gunshots, he had reason to believe that Graves posed an imminent, mortal threat to the officers under his command, which would have made the use of lethal force in response proportionate. Since we do not judge officers' actions "with the 20/20 vision of hindsight," Graham, 490 U.S. at 396, that justification for lethal force did not disappear in the moments between when Hedger heard the gunshots and when he tasered Graves. We have held that "[w]ithin a few seconds of reasonably perceiving a sufficient danger, officers may use deadly force even if in hindsight the facts show that the persons threatened could have escaped unharmed." Untalan v. City of  Lorain, 430 F.3d 312, 315 (6th Cir. 2005); see, e.g., Rush v. City of Lansing, 644 F. App'x 415, 423 (6th Cir. 2016) (upholding qualified immunity where an officer shot a knife-wielding suspect in the stomach, the suspect slumped backward, and the officer shot her in the head a few seconds later); Mullins, 805 F.3d at 763-64 (upholding qualified immunity where an officer threw an armed suspect to the ground, the suspect threw his gun over the officer's shoulder, and the officer shot the suspect twice within five seconds); Untalan, 430 F.3d at 315 (upholding qualified immunity where a suspect was shot after dropping a knife "a few seconds" prior). It follows a fortiori that Hedger's use of nonlethal force seven seconds after he heard gunshots was not excessive under clearly established law. The majority does not even attempt to grapple with these precedents.
The majority reaches a contrary conclusion only by "defin[ing] clearly established law at a high level of generality," which the Supreme Court "has repeatedly told courts . . . not to" do. Emmons, 139 S. Ct. at 503 (quoting Kisela, 138 S. Ct. at 1152). The majority cites caselaw for the proposition that an officer may not taser an unresisting suspect or a suspect who, although formerly resisting arrest, is now incapacitated. But the majority makes no effort to analogize Hedger's use of a taser to the facts of any prior precedent. "That is a problem" because, outside of "the rare obvious case," we must "identify a case where an officer acting under similar circumstances was held to have violated the Fourth Amendment." Id. at 504.
The majority protests that "every reasonable law enforcement officer in our circuit knows that to deploy a taser against a non-resisting suspect is excessive," Maj. Op. at 17, but that is simply begging the question. In many cases, whether a suspect qualifies as "non-resisting" will not be obvious, hence the need to find a case establishing "the violative nature of [the] particular conduct" at issue. Mullenix v. Luna, 136 S. Ct. 305, 308, 193 L. Ed. 2d 255 (2015) (per curiam) (quoting al-Kidd, 563 U.S. at 742). Here, Hedger on the one hand could see that Graves had been shot and was seriously injured and possibly in shock. On the other hand, he also had reason to believe that Graves had shot at Myers just a few seconds prior, still had a gun on his person, and was possibly still capable of firing it. Whether, under such circumstances, Graves qualified as no longer resisting is at least debatable, so in the absence of a case finding a constitutional violation under similar circumstances, Hedger must be granted qualified immunity.
None of the cases on which the majority relies squarely governs the facts of Hedger's use of a taser. In Landis v. Baker, an unpublished case that cannot on its own clearly establish law, an unarmed suspect grabbed an officer by the throat. 297 F. App'x 453, 456 (6th Cir. 2008). Upon being pepper-sprayed and struck with a baton, the suspect, who was mentally disturbed, walked off into the woods. Id. The two officers who had originally encountered the suspect called for backup. Id. Several minutes went by, and another officer arrived at the scene. Id. The officers found the suspect standing in a "water hole" and staring blankly. Id. The suspect did not respond to the officers' orders, and—when he did not comply—the officers converged on him, beat him ten times with a baton, knocked him over, and then tasered him five times over the course of a minute and thirty-seven seconds while he lay face down in the water. Id. at 457. The suspect ultimately drowned. Id. at 458.
These facts simply do not look like the tasering of Graves. Although the suspect  in Landis had previously resisted arrest, several minutes had passed, and the officers had time to form a new plan and regroup. They knew the suspect was not visibly armed and that they had him surrounded; they did not have to make a split-second decision about whether the suspect's prior threat (choking an officer) had abated; it plainly had. Hedger, on the other hand, had no time to step back and consider whether the threat had abated. The specific principle that we do not second guess officers' nonlethal use of force when they had reasonably perceived a threat a few seconds prior must prevail over the general principle that an officer may not taser a non-resisting suspect. Additionally, Hedger only tasered Graves for one five-second charge, the amount of time he needed to get from the bathroom doorway to Graves. By contrast, the officers in Landis tasered the suspect many times in rapid succession while the suspect lay in a position where tasering could likely—and did—lead to death.
The remaining precedents the majority cites are not even remotely analogous. Eldridge v. City of Warren involved the tasering of an unarmed man suspected of driving under the influence after he refused to step out of his car but did not otherwise resist. 533 F. App'x 529, 530-31 (6th Cir. 2013). And neither Cockrell v. City of Cincinnati, 468 F. App'x 491, 498 (6th Cir. 2012), nor Rudlaff v. Gillispie, 791 F.3d 638, 643 (6th Cir. 2015), held that an officer had violated a constitutional right. Clearly, none of these cases would have given Hedger fair notice of how much force he could have constitutionally used when he reasonably believed that Graves had shot at one of his fellow officers.
Our precedents show that Hedger's use of the taser did not violate a clearly established constitutional right. Accordingly, I would hold that Hedger is entitled to qualified immunity.
* * *
I would AFFIRM the district court's grant of summary judgment to the officers in its entirety. I therefore join Part II.1 of the majority opinion and respectfully dissent from Parts II.2 and II.3.

 

