, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part. Henderson claims she was fired because of her speech, which was protected by both the Michigan Whistleblower Protection Act (WPA) and the First Amendment. Causation is an element common to both claims. See West v. GMC, 469 Mich. 177, 665 N.W.2d 468, 471-72 (Mich. 2003) (per curiam); Dye v. Office of the Racing Comm'n, 702 F.3d 286, 294 (6th Cir. 2012). Yet Henderson has produced no evidence, direct or circumstantial, showing that Mayor Weaver knew, before Henderson's termination, that Henderson had reported her alleged wrongdoing to Anthony Chubb, the City's Interim Chief Legal Officer. There being no proof of a causal relationship between Henderson's speech and her termination, I would affirm the district court's grant of the defendants' motion for summary judgment as to both claims.1 
I.
On February 9, 2016, Henderson received an email from a reporter with MLive Media Group, warning her that she was the subject of a pending news story and asking for a comment. The story ran later that day. The article concerned a potential connection between a Legionnaires' disease outbreak and the Flint River water and described email correspondence between several state and local officials, including Henderson, which indicated that the officials knew of the potential connection approximately ten months before it was shared with the public. Mayor Weaver stated in her deposition that she saw the article while traveling and decided to confront Henderson and fire  her if Henderson could not satisfactorily explain the allegations in the article.
Henderson claims that, on that same day, Mayor Weaver's assistant, Maxine Murray, came to her concerned about the handling of donations the mayor's office had received to assist with the Flint water crisis.2  Murray expressed concern over Mayor Weaver's instruction to direct such donations into a fund set up by the mayor, instead of to the city-approved Safe Water/Safe Homes fund. According to Henderson, Murray was in tears and feared she would go to jail if she followed the mayor's direction. Concerned that Mayor Weaver was acting inappropriately, Henderson reported this conversation to Chubb, first in person and then in two emails.3 
On February 12, 2016, Henderson was called to Mayor Weaver's office, where the mayor, Chubb, and the Interim Human Resources Director were gathered; Mayor Weaver fired Henderson. Why the mayor fired Henderson is the subject of this litigation.
II.
Henderson claims she was fired because she reported the mayor's alleged financial misconduct to Chubb. To show a causal connection, Henderson had to provide evidence from which a jury could conclude that Mayor Weaver knew of Henderson's report before firing her—for if Mayor Weaver did not know of the report, then she could not have fired Henderson because of it. Henderson argues that Chubb told Mayor Weaver of the report before she was fired.4  Only speculation supports this claim, however. Henderson needs evidence. See Mulhall v. Ashcroft, 287 F.3d 543, 552 (6th Cir. 2002) ("Mulhall offers only conspiratorial theories, not the specific facts required under the Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56. Cf. Visser v. Packer Eng'g Assocs., Inc., 924 F.2d 655, 659 (7th Cir. 1991) (en banc) (holding that summary judgment was appropriate where the inferences plaintiff sought to draw from evidence were akin to 'flights of fancy, speculations, hunches, intuitions, or rumors about matters remote from [personal] experience')." (alteration in original)).
Direct Evidence. All the direct evidence is that Chubb did not tell Weaver of Henderson's report until after Henderson was fired. Chubb so testified, as did Weaver. Chubb explained that he did not immediately tell Weaver of Henderson's report because he was concerned about a conflict of interest. He, therefore, had his staff reach out to ethics counsel at the State Bar of Michigan, who advised that he should not investigate the matter. Chubb claimed that he eventually told Mayor Weaver of Henderson's report, but only after Henderson was fired, on February 24 or 25. Mayor Weaver provided a similar timeline in her deposition.
That Chubb and Weaver both disclaim communicating about Henderson's allegations before she was fired does not, of course, end the matter. Either Chubb or Weaver could have lied about or misremembered  the timing of Chubb's report to Weaver. Henderson is entitled to present her case to a jury if she can produce evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that that either is true.
Chubb's Motive to Lie. Weaver's motive to lie needs no exploration—if she did not know of the report before the firing, the lawsuit against her cannot proceed. But why would Chubb lie?
Henderson argues that Chubb had reason to tell Mayor Weaver of Henderson's report before the firing because he was trying to demonstrate loyalty to Weaver. At the time of Henderson's termination, Chubb wanted the permanent job of Chief Legal Officer; and after Henderson's termination, Chubb asked for the job, telling Mayor Weaver that "[he] had shown [his] support for her and that [he] thought it was time that that happened." But even if Chubb might have wanted to ingratiate himself to Weaver by immediately informing her of Henderson's allegations, Chubb repeatedly denied doing so. And by the time he made these denials, any motive he might have had to lie had vanished.
Chubb gave his first statement during an investigation into Henderson's report.5  By that time, he had already been passed over for the job he wanted. Having been spurned by Weaver's administration, and undisputedly "upset" about it, there is no reason to suspect him of lying to seek Weaver's favor. Henderson maintains, nonetheless, that Chubb likely lied because, at the time of that investigation, Chubb was in the midst of settlement negotiations with the City of Flint.6  It is sheer speculation, however, that some hope of an increased settlement of his claims against the City would cause Chubb to lie about when he told Mayor Weaver of Henderson's report. As the district court explained, "[a] plaintiff has to offer more than conspiratorial theories or speculation in order to rebut a decisionmaker's disavowal of knowledge."
Chubb again denied telling Mayor Weaver of Henderson's report before her firing in his deposition—which occurred six months after he had settled his claim against the City. Chubb had no reason to lie to protect Weaver or curry her favor, and yet he reiterated that he did not tell the mayor of the report before Henderson was fired. As the district court concluded, "given that Chubb did not get the position he wanted, was upset about it, and left employment with the City and had been pursuing his own claims against Weaver"—claims that he had settled before his deposition—"his alleged motive to lie (i.e., to garner favor with Weaver and get the position) is gone. Yet Chubb still maintains that he did not tell Weaver about the complaint before Henderson's termination." Henderson has not provided any evidence from which a jury could infer that Chubb lied when he testified that he did not tell the mayor about Henderson's report until after she was fired.7 
 Timing. Henderson next argues that the fact that she was fired only three days after she reported her suspicions to Chubb is "strong evidence of a causal connection." But, as the majority agrees, "[s]ubstantial case law from this circuit cautions about the permissibility of drawing an inference of causation from temporal proximity alone." Vereecke v. Huron Valley Sch. Dist., 609 F.3d 392, 400 (6th Cir. 2010) (collecting cases). Instead, "our case law can fairly be characterized as recognizing the possibility that, on a particular set of facts, extremely close temporal proximity could permit an inference of retaliatory motive, but also recognizing that often evidence in addition to temporal proximity is required to permit the inference." Id. at 401 (citations omitted); see also Debano-Griffin v. Lake County, 493 Mich. 167, 828 N.W.2d 634, 639-40 (Mich. 2013). Moreover, neither case that Henderson cites for her temporal-proximity argument supports the proposition that temporal proximity between the allegedly protected activity and termination is sufficient; rather, they support, at most, the proposition that temporal proximity between an employer learning of the activity and termination is sufficient in rare cases. See Asmo v. Keane, Inc., 471 F.3d 588, 593 (6th Cir. 2006) ("Asmo met the nexus requirement in part by establishing temporal proximity between Keane's learning of her pregnancy and her termination."); Mickey v. Zeidler Tool & Die Co., 516 F.3d 516, 525 (6th Cir. 2008) ("In those limited number of cases—like the one at bar—where an employer fires an employee immediately after learning of a protected activity, we can infer a causal connection between the two actions, even if Mickey had not presented other evidence of retaliation." (citation omitted)). The fact that three days passed between Henderson informing Chubb of Weaver's alleged wrongdoing and Henderson's firing cannot establish the essential link—that Mayor Weaver knew that Henderson had made the report. See Staunch v. Cont'l Airlines, Inc., 511 F.3d 625, 628-29 (6th Cir. 2008) ("It is not sufficient for the party opposing summary judgment to present a 'mere scintilla' of evidence; the evidence must be such that a reasonable jury could find in her favor." (citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986))).
Meeting Right Before Her Termination. Next, Henderson argues that Chubb must have told Mayor Weaver of her report at a meeting that occurred right before her termination, attended by the mayor, Chubb, and the Interim Human Resources Director, Charlie McClendon. But it is pure speculation that Chubb told Weaver of Henderson's report during this meeting. Both Chubb and Mayor Weaver deny that he told the mayor of Henderson's report before Henderson was terminated. And Henderson has not provided any testimony from the other attendee, McClendon. The mere fact that three people met before Henderson was fired does not support an inference that two of those people must have discussed a report.
Henderson claims that the fact that her firing was not announced in the same press release as the terminations of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief supports the inference that Chubb must have  informed Mayor Weaver of Henderson's report at this meeting. Henderson's argument appears to be that because her termination was not included in the press release, which went out before the meeting, Mayor Weaver must not have planned to fire her when the meeting began; she must have decided to fire her only when she learned that Henderson had made the report, and that must have occurred at the meeting. Nothing but speculation supports that case. One might as easily speculate that Henderson's termination was not announced in the earlier press release because Henderson herself had not yet been informed that she was being fired or because the Mayor's office for some reason thought it advantageous to announce the firings at separate times to control the news cycle. Henderson has provided no evidence, direct or circumstantial, that Chubb told Mayor Weaver of Henderson's report during this meeting that occurred right before she was fired.
Reasons for Termination. Finally, Henderson argues that a jury could conclude that Mayor Weaver must have known of her report because she gave changing and false reasons for firing Henderson. According to Henderson, Mayor Weaver first explained Henderson's termination by claiming that the State could no longer pay Henderson's salary but offered another explanation when Henderson rebutted that the City paid her salary, not the State. But a jury could not conclude that Mayor Weaver must have known of Henderson's report merely because she began the termination meeting by saying that the State would not pay Henderson's salary.
Mayor Weaver gave a second reason for terminating Henderson: that Henderson had not told the mayor about her knowledge of the potential connection of the Legionnaires' disease outbreak and the Flint River water. The mayor testified that, when she had seen the MLive article stating that Henderson was included on an email warning of the potential connection, she had decided to confront Henderson. Henderson, however, claims that she had spoken with the mayor before the election about how "Genesee County had said that [there were cases of Legionnaires' disease that were] possibly linked to the water." Henderson also cites two emails that she had sent to the mayor, one that noted that there had been eighty-seven cases of Legionnaires' disease with ten fatalities since June 2014, and one that describes the causes and transmission of the disease. Neither email indicates any connection between the disease and the city's use of the Flint River water. From this, Henderson argues that Mayor Weaver lied when she stated that "the last straw" was when she "found out that [Henderson] had known about the Legionnaires' or Legionella and had not shared that information with" the mayor; and, therefore, Henderson claims, a reasonable jury could conclude that Mayor Weaver must have actually fired Henderson because of her report to Chubb. But Henderson has shown, at most, that Mayor Weaver was disingenuous in trying to separate herself from Henderson's knowledge of the Flint water crisis. A reasonable jury could not consider this evidence and conclude that Mayor Weaver must have known of Henderson's report to Chubb. Henderson has not provided evidence that Mayor Weaver lied about the MLive article being a reason for terminating Henderson.
Finally, Henderson disputes Mayor Weaver's claim that part of the reason for terminating Henderson was the Mayor's desire to have her own team in place. Since taking office in November 2015, Mayor Weaver had expressed a desire to have her own team in place; but the emergency manager law prevented her from terminating  existing department heads. Weaver had asked Henderson to request the resignation of all department heads, but Henderson refused. Henderson ignores this fact, arguing that the mayor's claim that she wanted her own team in place "lacks credibility," citing in support: (1) Mayor Weaver's appointing Henderson to a new Flint Water Interagency Coordinating Committee on January 25, 2016, (2) Mayor Weaver's declining Henderson's offer to resign in early January 2016, shortly before Mayor Weaver's ability to terminate personnel was restored, and (3) text messages between Mayor Weaver and Henderson that demonstrate that the two communicated about city management. At most, a jury could infer from this that, in January, Mayor Weaver either no longer wanted her own team in place or at that point considered Henderson to be part of her team. But to leap from that to the conclusion that, therefore, Mayor Weaver had been told that Henderson had reported her suspicion that the mayor was engaged in unethical conduct would not be reasonable. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. at 252 ("The mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of the plaintiff's position will be insufficient; there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find for the plaintiff.").
* * *
Henderson has not produced direct or circumstantial evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that Mayor Weaver knew of Henderson's report to Chubb before she terminated Henderson. If she did not know of the report, Mayor Weaver could not have terminated Henderson because of it. Henderson's First Amendment retaliation and WPA claims, therefore, fail as a matter of law. I would hold that the district court properly granted summary judgment to Mayor Weaver and the City of Flint as to both of Henderson's claims. Accordingly, I respectfully join in the judgment in part and dissent in part.

 

