 in the result only).
I agree with the majority that defendant may be charged under MCL 257.625 with operating a motor vehicle in his private driveway while intoxicated. I write separately because I believe that the case before us fits easily within the statute; I would, therefore, wait for a case that pushes the boundaries of MCL 257.625 to explore where its edges lie.
MCL 257.625(1) states: "A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally  accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within this state if the person is operating while intoxicated." Driving drunk is, therefore, prohibited in three places: (1) "upon a highway," (2) in an "other place open to the general public," or (3) in "[another] place generally accessible to motor vehicles." We must decide whether driveways are "generally accessible to motor vehicles."
That to ask the question comes close to answering it is not, alone, sufficient to decide the case. But it is a clue that should not be discounted. Sometimes, when exploring the overall scheme of a statute, the initially intuitive reading proves wrong. But it is often the case that the most straightforward meaning is actually the one initially conveyed. A speaker of ordinary English would not readily conclude that driveways are not "generally accessible to motor vehicles," and that should give us pause before we conclude that the Legislature chose those words to produce such a result. Further study of the statute does not dislodge the initial impression. The whole point of a driveway is to provide access to motor vehicles. Where the place is designed to be capable of being reached by motor vehicles, the answer to whether it is "generally accessible to motor vehicles" is simple: of course.
I. "ACCESSIBLE"
An accessible place, the majority, the dissent, and I all agree, is one that is, in some sense, "capable of being reached." The majority focuses on whether a place is physically capable of being reached. While I agree that access often denotes physical access, and might well do so in this context, I share in the dissent's concern that,  unmodified, this definition might prove too much. A car may be physically capable of barreling down a barricade  or crashing into someone's living room but no one would say that a living room is "generally accessible to motor vehicles," just as no one would say that a location is wheelchair-accessible merely because, given sufficient momentum, a wheelchair can be made to surmount a curb. These examples help us see that "accessible" might be used in the majority's physical sense but with a narrower reach: some dictionaries define "accessible" as "easy to approach, reach, enter, speak with, or use." Random House Webster's College Dictionary (2001) (emphasis added). See also Webster's New World College Dictionary (5th ed) ("that can be approached or entered" or that is "easy to approach or enter"); The American Heritage Dictionary (2d college ed) ("Easily approached or entered."); Webster's II New College Dictionary (1995) ("Easily approached or entered."). On this definition, a ramp is wheelchair-accessible; a curb is not. So too with a driveway. Most are readily, or easily, physically accessible by motor vehicles; and even if some might not be—because they are graded too steeply or are in great disrepair—that would make no difference—the category (driveways) need only be "generally" so. The majority, however, focuses not on ease, but on capability. And while a driveway surely fits within the majority's definition, I share the dissent's concern that the majority may have adopted a rule that has few boundaries.1 
 The dissent, on the other hand, asks if the place is one "where vehicles are routinely permitted to enter." (Quotation marks and citation omitted; emphasis added.) The dissent, like the Court of Appeals panel below, has thus introduced the idea of legal or customary as opposed to physical accessibility. But if a place is "generally accessible" when "vehicles are routinely permitted to enter" by virtue of rights of ownership or permission granted by the owner, then surely a private driveway is such a place. Vehicles driven by friends and relatives, service providers, and salesmen are all "routinely permitted to enter" one's driveway. Moreover, one's own vehicles are routinely, indeed daily, permitted to enter one's driveway. The statute, it should be remembered, states only that the area must be "generally accessible to motor vehicles"; it does not say that it must be "generally accessible to motor vehicles owned by others." And so even if "accessible" means "legally accessible," I see nothing in the statute to suggest that one's own trips up and down the driveway should not count. Driveways, in general, are legally accessible by, at least, some motor vehicles.
II. "GENERALLY"
Whether "accessible" is defined as "physically capable of being reached,"  "physically easy to reach," or "legally capable of being reached," I conclude that driveways are "accessible to motor vehicles." But what, then, of "generally?" The majority defines "generally"  as "usually."2  The dissent, however, fears that the majority's rule threatens to "cover[] any land not under water" despite the Legislature's decision not to prohibit driving while intoxicated in all places "within this state." Cf. MCL 257.625m(1) (stating that an intoxicated person "shall not operate a commercial motor vehicle within this state"). To avoid such a broad interpretation, the dissent reads "generally" to mean "'to or by most people; widely; popularly; extensively.'"3  Quoting Webster's New World College Dictionary (5th ed). The dissent thus requires that the place where  vehicles are "'routinely permitted to enter'" also be available "'to or by most [motor vehicles],'"4  "'widely,'" or to "an appreciable number of motor vehicles." (Citations omitted.) And because any particular private driveway is not legally accessible to most motor vehicles, the dissent concludes that, as a category, private driveways are not generally accessible to motor vehicles.5 
  While the dissent's interpretation of "generally accessible to motor vehicles" might be one way to make the statute work, it certainly takes the long way home when there are much straighter routes to resolving this case. And while I share the dissent's concern that the majority may have adopted a rule that has few, if any, boundaries, the dissent's desire to avoid an overly broad interpretation has caused it to eliminate the obvious case. I cannot agree with the dissent that driveways are not "generally accessible to motor vehicles." If "generally" means "usually," or "in general," then driveways are "generally accessible to motor vehicles," whether "accessible" means "physically capable of being reached," "physically easy to reach," or "legally capable of being reached." Only if "generally" includes some idea of volume ("popularly") and "accessible" means "legally so," could driveways possibly be out of bounds. But that reading comes at the cost of the most natural reading of the statutory text. One stumbles to say that "driveways are not generally accessible to motor vehicles" and that is sufficient to dispel for me whatever doubt the dissent's complex formulation might raise.
* * *
Because I believe that driveways are "generally accessible to motor vehicles," I would resolve this straightforward case on its own facts and leave for a future case the determination of the precise boundaries of MCL 257.625(1). I, therefore, concur in the judgment only.
Joan L. Larsen
