).
I join the Court's opinion in full but write separately to address the points raised by the dissent. Two terms ago, in People v Lockridge, 498 Mich 358; 870 NW2d 502 (2015), this Court announced two propositions that dramatically altered sentencing law and practice in Michigan. First, compelled by the United States Supreme Court's decision in Alleyne v United States, 570 U.S. 99; 133 S Ct 2151; 186 L Ed 2d 314 (2013), this Court held that Michigan's system of applying mandatory sentencing guidelines was unconstitutional. Lockridge, 498 Mich at 388-389. Second, as a remedy for that unconstitutionality, the Court "Booker-ize[d]" the Michigan guidelines—which is to say, it adopted the remedy chosen by the United States Supreme Court in United States v Booker1  to remedy similar unconstitutionality in the operation of the  federal sentencing guidelines. Lockridge, 498 Mich at 391. The dissent acknowledges, with some lament, the first of these events of 2015, but, curiously, writes as if the second had never happened—as if this Court were today, for the first time, announcing a remedy for the constitutional violation identified in Lockridge. But that is decidedly not so. The Court clearly announced its remedial holding in Lockridge, and the evidence clearly reflects that the participants in Michigan's criminal justice system understood. That fact deprives the dissent of much of its force.
The Court was clear in Lockridge: the sentencing guidelines were rendered advisory. The dissent is right that some of the language in Lockridge, if read in isolation, could raise a question about the extent of Lockridge's remedial holding. See, e.g., id. at 364 ("To remedy the constitutional violation, we sever MCL 769.34(2) to the extent that it makes the sentencing guidelines range as scored on the basis of facts beyond those admitted by the defendant or found by the jury beyond a reasonable doubt mandatory."). But any doubts on this score should have been resolved by the Court's plain statement in Lockridge: "[T]he prosecution, in turn, asks us to Booker-ize the Michigan sentencing guidelines, i.e., render them advisory only. We agree that this is the most appropriate remedy." Id. at 391; see also id. at 365 n 1 ("To the extent that any part of MCL 769.34 or another statute refers to use of the sentencing guidelines as mandatory or refers to departures from the guidelines, that part or statute is also severed or struck down as necessary."); id. at 391 ("[W]e need only substitute the word 'may' for 'shall' in MCL 769.34(2) and remove the requirement in MCL 769.34(3) that a trial court that departs from the applicable guidelines range must articulate a substantial and compelling reason for that departure.");  id. ("Like the Supreme Court in Booker, however, we conclude that although the guidelines can no longer be mandatory, they remain a highly relevant consideration in a trial court's exercise of sentencing discretion."); id. ("Accordingly, we sever MCL 769.34(2) to the extent that it is mandatory and strike down the requirement of a 'substantial and compelling reason' to depart from the guidelines range in MCL 769.34(3)."); id. at 392 ("Because sentencing courts will hereafter not be bound by the applicable sentencing guidelines range, this remedy cures the  Sixth Amendment flaw in our guidelines scheme by removing the unconstitutional constraint on the court's discretion."); id. at 399 ("To remedy the constitutional flaw in the guidelines, we hold that they are advisory only."). The Court's directive in Lockridge cannot be reasonably mistaken. Neither the parties, the amici, nor the dissent cites any case in which a lower court has expressed confusion over whether Lockridge rendered the guidelines fully advisory. The dissent too once understood the remedy adopted in Lockridge to be clear:
Because I conclude that Michigan's sentencing system does not violate the Sixth Amendment, I need not address the appropriate remedy for what I view as a nonexistent violation. Nonetheless, I submit that the majority has not been persuasive in its adoption without modification or significant analysis the so-called Booker remedy that renders the sentencing guidelines 'advisory only' (meaning that the guidelines no longer have any binding effect) . . . . [Id. at 462 n 40 (Markman, J., dissenting) (emphasis added).]
Now, however, the dissent states that "Lockridge was not entirely clear regarding whether the guidelines were always to be advisory or whether they could  remain mandatory in limited respects."2  The dissent instead states that "[t]he question in the instant case is whether the majority's remedy of rendering the mandatory guidelines 'fully advisory' or 'advisory in all applications' constitutes the remedy that is most reasonably consistent with the Legislature's intentions or rather strikes down more of the guidelines than is necessary to render them constitutional"; that is, "the question now is only which alternative is next best [to fully mandatory guidelines] . . . ." Respectfully, that is not the question in the instant case; that was the question in Lockridge, and the Court answered it by opting to Booker-ize the guidelines, i.e., render them fully advisory. Lockridge, 498 Mich at 365, 389-391. As I see it, the only appropriate question now3  is whether to maintain the Lockridge remedy of fully advisory guidelines or instead to overrule our prior decision.4 
 The dissent places much emphasis on MCL 8.5 and argues that the effect of this  statute, although brought to this Court's attention in Lockridge, was not given proper consideration by the Court. If we were to properly consider the effect of MCL 8.5, the dissent claims, we would come to the conclusion that the Legislature would have preferred any other remedy than the one adopted in Lockridge.5  That strikes me as unlikely. But even if it were true, that would only go to whether Lockridge was wrong to have Booker-ized the guidelines; it would not tell us what to do about it now.
The remedy adopted in Lockridge two terms ago brought dramatic change to Michigan's criminal sentencing scheme. The dissent draws from Lockridge's jurisprudential youth the conclusion that the decision "has hardly 'become so embedded, so accepted, so fundamental, to everyone's expectations that to change it would produce not just readjustments, but practical real-world dislocations.'" Post at 34, quoting  Robinson v Detroit, 462 Mich 439, 466; 613 NW2d 307 (2000). It is true, in the run of cases, that a decision two terms old is less likely to have produced substantial real-world effects than one two decades its senior. But not every youngster takes time to make its presence felt. In the two years since Lockridge was decided, this Court and the Court of Appeals have each remanded hundreds of cases for resentencing in light of the guidelines having been rendered advisory,6  and tens of thousands of defendants have been initially sentenced under the now-advisory guidelines.7  Any changes to the remedy adopted in Lockridge would require upending criminal sentencing in this state for a second time in two years and would set off another round of litigated questions, including whether and how to resentence the resentenced.
Against the prospect of this turbulence, we should ask: What is to be gained? When a court decides how to remedy a constitutional violation, it is necessarily operating with uncertainty. As the dissent rightly and repeatedly points out, the task, beyond eliminating the constitutional violation, is to ascertain, as best it can, the will of the Legislature. E.g., post at 10 ("The bottom-line question concerning severability is always one of legislative intentions."). But a court is only approximating the will of the Legislature. The Legislature can tell us its actual will. In Lockridge, this  Court decided, as was its duty then, on a remedy  that it believed best effectuated the Legislature's intent. If it erred, the Legislature is empowered to install any sentencing scheme that it considers best for the Michigan criminal justice system, limited only by the state and federal constitutions.8  It is certainly better  equipped than this Court to weigh the policy options. The ball is in the Legislature's court. Booker, 543 U.S. at 265. In the meantime, I join the majority's opinion in full.
Joan L. Larsen
David F. Viviano
