
  CautionAs of: September 19, 2020 8:08 PM Z
Blanc v. United States Atty. Gen.
United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
August 16, 2019, Decided
No. 19-12508-B

Reporter
2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 24540 *
 MAXIME P. BLANC, Petitioner, versus U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL, Respondent.  
Subsequent History: Review pending at Blanc v. United States AG, 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 27099 (11th Cir., Sept. 6, 2019)  
Prior History:  [*1] Petitions for Review of a Decision of the Board of Immigration Appeals.
  
Counsel: For Maxime Blanc, Petitioner: Sean Bedford, Matthew L.J.D. Dowell, Alston & Bird, LLP, Atlanta, GA. 
Maxime Blanc, Petitioner, Pro se, Gadsden, AL. 
For U.S. Attorney General, Respondent: John Frederick Stanton, Oil, U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Immigration Litigation, Washington, DC; Alfie Owens, DHS/ICE Office of Chief Counsel - ATL, Atlanta, GA.  
Judges: Before: MARTIN, JORDAN, and GRANT, Circuit Judges. MARTIN, Circuit Judge, Concurring. GRANT, Circuit Judge, Dissenting.  
Opinion




BY THE COURT:
Petitioner Maxime P. Blanc's emergency motion for a stay of removal is GRANTED. See Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 129 S. Ct. 1749, 173 L. Ed. 2d 550 (2009). Judge Grant dissents from the grant of the stay.
Mr. Blanc's motion to proceed in forma pauperis and his motion to have counsel appointed on appeal are also GRANTED. Attorneys Matt Dowell and Sean Bedford of Alston & Bird are hereby appointed as counsel for Mr. Blanc. The opening brief shall be due seventy days from the date of entry of this order.
Concur by: MARTIN  
Concur




MARTIN, Circuit Judge, Concurring:
Mr. Blanc's petition for review raises the issue of the immigration judge's ("IJ") failure to inform him about pre-conclusion voluntary departure during his removal proceedings. [*2]  The dissent does not believe Mr. Blanc has shown a strong likelihood of success on this claim. I believe he has.
Agency regulations require an "Immigration Judge [to] advise a respondent of the forms of relief for which he or she is apparently eligible, including voluntary departure." Matter of C-B-, 25 I. & N. Dec. 888, 891 (BIA 2012) (citing In re Cordova, 22 I. & N. Dec. 966, 970 n.4 (BIA 1999) and 8 C.F.R. § 1240.11(a)(2)). Yet, it seems the IJ presiding over Mr. Blanc's removal proceedings never once informed him about pre-conclusion voluntary departure. This is a discretionary form of relief that permits noncitizens to voluntarily depart the country before the conclusion of removal proceedings and entry of a final order of removal. See 8 U.S.C. § 1229c(a)(1); 8 C.F.R. § 1240.26(b). The dissent seems to agree with me up to this point. Dissent at 1. Without being advised about pre-conclusion voluntary departure, it is not surprising that Mr. Blanc, who was proceeding pro se, did not apply for it. He has since intimated he would have pursued pre-conclusion voluntary departure had he known it was an option for him.
The dissenting opinion says this is beside the point. The dissents says the Board of Immigration Appeals ("BIA"), exercised its own discretion on appeal to deny Mr. Blanc pre-conclusion voluntary departure, thereby taking this issue [*3]  beyond our Court's jurisdiction. Dissent at 2; see 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(B). I do not read the BIA's decision the same way.
The BIA held that the IJ did not "exceed[] his authority in determining that the respondent did not merit a favorable exercise of discretion for . . . voluntary departure." After concluding that the IJ did not err in the IJ's discretionary determination with respect to Mr. Blanc's post-conclusion voluntary departure application, the BIA went on to say:
Voluntary departure is a discretionary form of relief, whether pre-conclusion or post-conclusion voluntary departure. . . . Since the respondent did not demonstrate that he warranted a discretionary grant of voluntary departure, it was immaterial that the Immigration Judge did not inform him of the potential availability of pre-conclusion voluntary departure.
The dissent believes this passage means the BIA exercised its own discretion. Dissent at 2. However, the BIA's use of the past-tense suggests the opposite to me. I read the BIA's decision to refer to the same exercise of discretion by the IJ it had just referred to in the passage before. Were it true that the BIA exercised its own discretion in the first instance to deny Mr. Blanc pre-conclusion voluntary departure, [*4]  I think the decision would have had to say something like: "Since the respondent has not demonstrated that he warrants a discretionary grant of pre-conclusion voluntary departure, it was immaterial that the Immigration Judge did not inform him of the potential availability of pre-conclusion voluntary departure." I would expect the decision would have at least engaged in some independent analysis befitting an exercise of discretion in the first instance. Instead, the BIA decision did neither.
Because the BIA made no discretionary decision about whether Mr. Blanc was entitled to pre-conclusion voluntary departure, the Immigration and Nationality Act's ("INA") jurisdictional bar does not apply. See Gonzalez-Oropeza v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 321 F.3d 1331, 1332 (11th Cir. 2003) (per curiam) (concluding 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(B) "does not preclude review of non-discretionary legal decisions"). I do not, as the dissent hypothesizes, think the IJ's legal error grants us jurisdiction over the BIA's discretionary decision despite the INA's jurisdictional bar. Dissent at 2-3. What I think, instead, is that the BIA did not make a discretionary decision at all, which means the jurisdictional bar never attached.
As for the merits of Mr. Blanc's claim, the BIA likely erred in its harmlessness analysis. The BIA found [*5]  it "immaterial" that the IJ failed to inform Mr. Blanc of pre-conclusion voluntary departure because it believed the IJ denied Blanc post-conclusion voluntary departure as a matter of discretion. I question the soundness of this reasoning. As I understand the law, the IJ could not have exercised its discretion to deny Mr. Blanc post-conclusion voluntary departure because the IJ had no discretion to begin with.
The INA forbids granting post-conclusion voluntary departure to noncitizens who have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude within the last five years. See 8 U.S.C. § 1229c(b)(1)(B). In this case, the IJ considered Mr. Blanc's prior convictions (including one in 2016) to be crimes involving moral turpitude. Once Mr. Blanc failed the INA's moral character criterion, the IJ was required by law to deny Blanc's application for post-conclusion voluntary departure. Cf. Cole v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 712 F.3d 517, 530 (11th Cir. 2013) (explaining that "the Attorney General has no discretion, and the [INA] automatically bars the alien from withholding of removal" if the "alien has committed an aggravated felony or felonies, and the aggregate term of imprisonment is five years or more"). As a result, the IJ could not have made a discretionary decision about post-conclusion [*6]  voluntary departure, much less one that could be transferred to a hypothetical application for pre-conclusion voluntary departure.1  For this reason, I believe the BIA's harmlessness analysis was flawed and Mr. Blanc will likely prevail on his request for a remand. See, e.g., Perona-Aguilar v. Holder, 452 F. App'x 775, 777-78 (9th Cir. 2011) (per curiam) (unpublished).
At bottom, Mr. Blanc's claim is that the IJ violated the regulations by failing to inform him of pre-conclusion voluntary departure and that the BIA erred in its harmlessness analysis. This Court has jurisdiction to review that claim. I view Mr. Blanc as having made a strong showing that he will prevail on that claim. I therefore concur in the decision to grant him a stay of removal.
Dissent by: GRANT  
Dissent




GRANT, Circuit Judge, Dissenting:
Because Blanc has not demonstrated a strong likelihood of success on the merits of his petition, his motion for stay of removal should be denied. See Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434, 129 S. Ct. 1749, 173 L. Ed. 2d 550 (2009).
Blanc complains that the Immigration Judge failed to advise him that he could apply for preconclusion voluntary departure. Based on the available hearing transcripts, it appears that this is so. But when Blanc raised the issue on appeal to the Board of Immigration Appeals, the BIA made its own decision that preconclusion [*7]  voluntary departure was not warranted as a matter of discretion—regardless of whether Blanc was statutorily eligible for that privilege. Because the BIA made a discretionary decision to deny voluntary departure, (1) we lack jurisdiction to review that decision, and (2) even if our jurisdiction to review the IJ's arguable legal error somehow survived the BIA's independent exercise of discretion, the BIA's decision rendered any error by the IJ harmless.
In its order, the BIA first addressed the IJ's denial of Blanc's motion for postconclusion voluntary departure under 8 U.S.C. § 1229c(b), discussing the IJ's weighing of the equities and concluding that "we do not find that the Immigration Judge exceeded his authority in determining that the respondent did not merit a favorable exercise of discretion for cancellation of removal and voluntary departure." The BIA then separately—and explicitly—addressed the question of preconclusion voluntary departure, as follows: "The respondent argues throughout his brief that the Immigration Judge should have advised him of his right to pre-conclusion voluntary departure. Voluntary departure is a discretionary form of relief, whether pre-conclusion or post-conclusion voluntary [*8]  departure. Since the respondent did not demonstrate that he warranted a discretionary grant of voluntary departure, it was immaterial that the Immigration Judge did not inform him of the potential availability of pre-conclusion voluntary departure." In other words, because the BIA found that discretionary relief was not warranted, the IJ's failure to inform Blanc of the availability of such relief was harmless.
As the BIA noted, voluntary departure is "a form of discretionary relief." Dada v. Mukasey, 554 U.S. 1, 4, 128 S. Ct. 2307, 171 L. Ed. 2d 178 (2008). It is within the BIA's power to decide matters of discretion de novo on appeal: "The Board may review questions of law, discretion, and judgment and all other issues in appeals from decisions of immigration judges de novo." 8 C.F.R. § 1003.1(d)(3)(ii). And we lack jurisdiction to review the BIA's denial of discretionary relief, except to the extent that the petitioner raises constitutional claims or questions of law. 8 U.S.C. §§ 1252(a)(2)(B) & (a)(2)(D); Bing Quan Lin v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 881 F.3d 860, 871 (11th Cir. 2018). In the context of voluntary departure, this means that we retain jurisdiction to review the BIA's "non-discretionary legal determinations as to statutory eligibility," but not its purely "discretionary decision denying voluntary departure." Alvarado v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 610 F.3d 1311, 1314 (11th Cir. 2010). The BIA's decision that preconclusion voluntary departure was not [*9]  warranted in Blanc's case was made as a matter of discretion, not based on Blanc's statutory eligibility for that relief.
The majority likely sees the IJ's failure to inform Blanc about his potential eligibility for preconclusion voluntary departure as a legal error sufficient to invoke our jurisdiction. But when "the BIA issues its own decision, we review only that decision, except to the extent the BIA expressly adopts the IJ's opinion or reasoning." Lopez v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 914 F.3d 1292, 1297 (11th Cir. 2019). So by making its own decision that discretionary relief was not warranted, the BIA effectively intervened to cut off our jurisdiction. At the very least, the BIA's independent decision made the IJ's failure to inform Blanc about the availability of preconclusion voluntary departure irrelevant and rendered any legal error in that failure harmless. Either way, Blanc cannot succeed on the merits of his petition for review, and granting a stay of removal simply to delay the inevitable runs contrary to the standard that is supposed to govern the exercise of our discretion in such cases. See Nken, 556 U.S. at 434. I respectfully dissent.

 

End of Document
