 specially.
The Court today concludes that evidence of injury in connection with childbirth is sufficient to prove that a victim sustained a physical injury for purposes of OCGA § 16-6-4 (c), and because that conclusion reflects a fair understanding of the statute that the General Assembly has enacted, I concur in the judgment.8  I write separately, however, to note a  troubling consequence of our decision, one that the General Assembly likely never intended.
To the extent that any injury sustained in childbirth is a physical injury under the statute, anyone who causes a child under the age of consent to become pregnant and experience childbirth will be exposed to prosecution for aggravated child molestation, a crime that is among the most serious felonies and is punishable by imprisonment for no less than 25 years and up to life. See OCGA § 16-6-4 (d) (1). No one will lose much sleep over the prospect that someone like the appellant in this case — a sexually predatory father who repeatedly had sexual intercourse with his teenaged daughter — might spend the rest of his natural life in prison. But understanding the statute as we do today, a 16-year-old high school sophomore who has intercourse — without any force or other coercion — with his 15-year-old girlfriend and causes her to become pregnant and experience childbirth also would face the prospect of imprisonment for life.
With recent revisions of the statutes concerning sex crimes against children, the General Assembly has acknowledged that felony sentences are too harsh in many cases involving sexual activity between a willing teenager under the age of consent and another teenager. See, e.g., OCGA §§ 16-6-3 (c) (“If the victim is at least 14 but less than 16 years of age and the person convicted of statutory rape is 18 years of age or younger and is no more than four years older than the victim, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.”); 16-6-4 (b) (2) (“If the victim is at least 14 but less than 16 years of age and the person convicted of child molestation is 18 years of age or younger and is no more than four years older than the victim, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor … .”); 16-6-4 (d) (2) (“A person convicted of the offense of aggravated child molestation when … [t]he victim is at least 13 but less than 16 years of age; [t]he person convicted … is 18 years of age or younger and is no more than four years older than the victim; and [t]he basis of the charge of aggravated child molestation involves an act of sodomy shall be guilty of a misdemeanor … .”). But the General Assembly has made no provision for more lenient treatment of teenagers in cases of aggravated child molestation predicated on physical injury.9  Consequently, aggravated child molestation predicated on physical injury — which, this Court now has held, may be proved by evidence of an injury sustained in childbirth — is punishable only by “imprisonment for life or by a split sentence that is a term of imprisonment for not less than 25 years and not exceeding life imprisonment, followed by probation for life.” OCGA § 16-6-4 (d) (1).
Whether a teenager in a particular case actually would face such a harsh sentence depends in significant part, of course, on the discretion of the district attorney. In cases involving, for instance, a 16-year-old boy, a 15-year-old girl, sexual intercourse without force or coercion, and a resulting pregnancy and childbirth, I expect that most district attorneys would exercise their discretion to decline prosecution altogether or to pursue lesser charges than aggravated child molestation predicated on physical injury. But there is little reason for us to have confidence that every such case will come out that way.10  See Humphrey v. Wilson, 282 Ga. 520  (652 SE2d 501) (2007). If that is a concern for the General Assembly, perhaps it will consider a further revision of OCGA § 16-6-4.
Warren, Justice, concurring specially.
Because I agree with the majority's conclusion, I concur in the judgment. Like Justice Blackwell, however, I write to highlight an issue related to OCGA § 16-6-4 (c), the aggravated child molestation statute.
The text of OCGA § 16-6-4 (c) does not expressly include or exclude pregnancy in the definition of an “act [that] physically injures.” Nor does it delineate pregnancy as a separate predicate for aggravated child molestation, as it does for “an act of sodomy.” Id. Today, the majority holds that evidence of child molestation that proximately causes “a very painful and physically traumatic childbirth nine months later … is legally sufficient to support a jury finding of the physical injury element of aggravated child molestation.” Maj. op. at 180. But the majority does not answer — because it need not answer in this particular case — whether evidence of pregnancy alone can constitute “physical[ ] injur[y],” and can thus serve as a predicate for aggravated child molestation under OCGA § 16-6-4 (c).
Some state legislatures have definitively answered that question by making the policy judgment to enact statutes that specifically include “pregnancy” in a definition of “injury” or “bodily harm.” See, e.g., N.M. Stat. Ann. § 30-9-10 (D) (“‘[P]ersonal injury’ means bodily injury to a lesser degree than great bodily harm and includes, but is not limited to, disfigurement, mental anguish, chronic or recurrent pain, pregnancy or disease or injury to a sexual or reproductive organ”); see also Del. Code Ann. tit. 11, § 9002 (10) (“‘Personal injury’ shall mean bodily harm; or mental, emotional or psychological harm, or shall include pregnancy resulting from the crime.”); Minn. Stat. § 611A.52 (Subd. 9) (“‘Injury’ means actual bodily harm including pregnancy and emotional trauma.”); Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 13, § 5351 (4) (“As used in this chapter: ‘Injury’ means actual bodily harm or pregnancy, or emotional harm resulting from the crime.”) (all emphasis supplied).
Other states expressly delineate pregnancy as a statutory aggravator for a crime — not because pregnancy is deemed an “injury,” but because it serves as a separate and independent basis for elevated punishment, just as physical injury and sodomy constitute separate and independent bases for elevated punishments under Georgia's aggravated child molestation statute. Compare, e.g., OCGA § 16-6-4 (c) (“A person commits the offense of aggravated child molestation when such person commits an offense of child molestation which act physically injures the child or involves an act of sodomy.”) with Wis. Stat. § 940.225 (1) (a) (first-degree sexual assault committed when a person “[h]as sexual contact or sexual intercourse with another person without consent of that person and causes pregnancy or great bodily harm to that person”) (emphasis supplied). Cf. Wash. Rev. Code § 9.94A.535 (3) (i) (allowing for enhanced sentence if “[t]he offense resulted in the pregnancy of a child victim of rape”) (emphasis supplied).
If Georgia's General Assembly would like to clarify definitively whether pregnancy is a predicate for aggravated child molestation — because it is (or is not) delineated as a separate statutory aggravator, because it is included in (or excluded from) “physical[ ] injur[y]” under OCGA § 16-6-4 (c), or because of some other type of legislative revision best imagined by the legislative branch — then it should lift that determination out of the hands of prosecutors, juries, and judges and act as policymaker to amend the statute. Absent further guidance from the General Assembly, however, Georgia courts may be faced with a more complicated line-drawing exercise than this Court has had to engage in today.

 

