.
I respectfully dissent. The court below concluded that the indictment in this case was not returned in a court proceeding open to the public simply because lawyer J. Cameron Tribble did not make it to the courtroom in time to observe the return. The court found that Tribble did not arrive soon enough because he was held up at a security checkpoint until someone arrived to escort him to the courtroom. And the court reasoned that the failure of an escort to appear “without any delay whatsoever” effectively closed the court proceedings that Tribble sought to observe. The court below, I think, applied an incorrect legal standard in assessing whether the delay at the security checkpoint effectively closed the court to the public, and for that reason, I would vacate the judgment below and remand for the court to apply the correct legal standard and reconsider whether the indictment was returned in open court.
When a citizen comes to the courthouse to observe a court proceeding, he may encounter some delay along the way. That delay might be occasioned by a congested security checkpoint, a crowded elevator, an absence of signs clearly identifying the way to the courtroom, misinformation about the particular  courtroom in which a proceeding is to be held, or any number of other inconvenient circumstances. As Judge Boggs correctly notes in his dissent,17  not every delay amounts to a closure of the court. Only when a citizen is unreasonably prevented by courthouse officials from attending a court proceeding — either because his admission to the courtroom is unreasonably refused altogether, unreasonably delayed for a time, or  otherwise unreasonably hindered — can it be said that the proceeding is closed to the public. See Purvis v. State, 288 Ga. 865, 868 (708 SE2d 283) (2011) (holding, with respect to right of public to attend criminal trials, that court has obligation “to take reasonable measures to accommodate public attendance”) (emphasis supplied).
The court below made no finding about whether the delay that Tribble encountered was unreasonable, presumably because, as I understand its order, it found “any delay whatsoever” unacceptable.18  This reflects the application of an incorrect legal standard. The court below also made no findings about many of the circumstances that may prove to be important in assessing the reasonableness of the delay, including, for instance, whether it was reasonable for the Sheriff to require that citizens generally, and Tribble specifically, have an escort, for how long Tribble was delayed by the need to await an escort, whether the escort reasonably should have arrived sooner, and whether Tribble would have made it to the courtroom soon enough to observe the return of the indictment, even with the more prompt arrival of an escort. With so many unanswered questions,19  I cannot say as a matter of law that the indictment was not returned in a proceeding open to the public,20  notwithstanding that I have serious  doubts that it was. Consequently, I would vacate the decision of the court below and remand for that court to make the appropriate  findings and reconsider whether the indictment was returned in open court, applying the correct legal standard. Because the majority does not, I respectfully dissent.
Boggs, Judge, dissenting.
Because this record shows that the indictment was returned in open court, I respectfully dissent.
The majority's holding on the subject of public judicial proceedings is misplaced under the facts presented in this case. Although access to the courthouse was limited and required the assistance of court personnel, it was not prohibited. Other members of the public and members of the media were present in the courtroom, which demonstrates beyond dispute that the courtroom was indeed open to the public. A partner in the firm representing Brown instructed Tribble, an associate of the firm representing Brown who explained that he did “mostly civil practice,” to attend the reading of the indictment. Both Tribble and the partner were aware of the limited access at the courthouse that day, yet Tribble left his law office at 3:25 p.m., only 35 minutes before he believed that the indictment would be returned. Tribble testified that the courtroom was unlocked, no one stopped him at the door to the courtroom, and other people were present in the courtroom.
As explained in Zugar v. State, 194 Ga. 285 (21 SE2d 647) (1942),21  “[i]t is a fundamental part of our judicial system that the general public be permitted to witness court proceedings sufficiently to guarantee that there may never be practiced in this State secret or star-chamber court proceedings.” Id. at 289. The proceedings here were not “secret or star-chamber court proceedings.” The face of the indictment signed by the jury foreperson and bailiff shows that it was returned in open court, and the defendant has come forth with no evidence showing otherwise. The majority's holding here will result in challenges to the open-court rule based upon claims by lawyers or members of the public who arrive at the courthouse minutes before  they believe an indictment is to be returned, only to be briefly detained by courthouse security or a crowded elevator.
Both of the cases cited by the majority are inapposite. In Cadle v. State, 101 Ga. App. 175 (113 SE2d 180) (1960), the judge received the indictment from the bailiff in the presence of the clerk in a room that served as the office of the presiding judge. Id. at 180 (1). Although the door was open between that room and an outer room occupied by members of the public and one of the attorneys for the defendant, the court held that “the evidence relied upon to show that the court was at that time and place being held open to the public is, to say the least, doubtful and uncertain.” (Emphasis in original.) Id. In Zugar, supra, the bailiff delivered an indictment to the clerk of court in the absence of the judge. Id. at 287-288. Neither of these circumstances is present here.

 

