 in the judgment.
I agree with the majority that the probation provision and the suspension provision work in tandem. Unlike the majority, however, I see no tension between those two provisions as they apply to the issue before us today: namely, whether the sentencing court is bound to impose or execute a suspended sentence once the defendant has violated a condition of the suspension. In my view, under both the suspension and probation provisions, the district court judge is not bound by the suspended sentence, and instead has the authority at resentencing to impose any sentence that could have been imposed originally. I therefore concur only in the majority's judgment.
The suspension provision provides that:
When it shall appear to the satisfaction of the court that the ends of justice and the best interest of the public, as well as the defendant, will be best served thereby, the court shall have the power to suspend the imposition or execution of sentence for such period and upon such terms and conditions as it may deem best . . . .
§ 18-1.3-401(11), C.R.S. (2008) (emphasis added). The court of appeals found, and I agree, that if the defendant violates the "terms and conditions" of the suspended sentence, the sentence is no longer "suspended" and is instead "imposed" or "executed." Contrary to the majority, then, maj. op. at 13, I believe the term "suspend" is unambiguous, as it connotes a temporary stoppage with resumption at some later date. See Sigala v. Atencio's Market, 184 P.3d 40, 47 (Colo. 2008) (Eid, J., dissenting). 4  Here, the defendant's sentence was temporarily held in abeyance while she complied with the conditions of the suspension. Once it was determined that she had violated those conditions, the sentence was revived.
The court of appeals was wrong in my view, however, to find that the revived sentence was binding on the district court. Under the suspension provision, the district court has the authority to suspend the sentence once again and to resentence the defendant to any sentence that it could have imposed originally. And that is precisely what occurred in this case: the district court resuspended the defendant's four-year and eighteen-month DOC sentences, and sentenced the defendant to three years in community corrections. Maj. op. at 17.
This is the same result that occurs under the probation provision, which provides that, once probation is revoked, "the court may then impose any sentence . . . which might originally have been imposed." § 16-11-206(5), C.R.S. (2008). Thus, in my view, it does not matter whether the original sentence in this case is characterized as a sentence suspended on a condition of probation, or as a sentence to probation combined with a "notif[ication] . . . of the sentence that would [have been] imposed but for the alternative of probation." Maj. op. at 16. The court had the same options available to it on resentencing either way -- that is, to resentence the defendant to any sentence it could have initially imposed.
 As the majority notes in passing, the suspension authority and the probation provision appeared in the same statute, entitled "Probation," prior to 1972. maj. op. at 7; see also § 39-16-6(1) and § 39-16-9(2), C.R.S. (1963). The language of both provisions was consistent on the issue before us then, and is consistent now -- despite the fact that the language today appears in two different statutes. Because the issue raised in this case can be resolved on this ground alone, I concur only in the judgment of the majority.

 

