.
According to the majority, Howl sufficiently alleged that Officer Alvarado participated with Medina in planting incriminating evidence against him. Yet a straightforward reading of the complaint reveals that—as alleged by Howl—it was Medina who planted the evidence, and Officer Alvarado who, in turn, mistakenly relied on her. Misguided reliance on an informant does not equate to an instruction to fabricate. The majority properly points out that we are obligated to draw reasonable inferences from the complaint. Slip Op. at 5-6. However, in my view, a fabrication theory against Officer Alvarado is a step beyond an inference in this case. Because I would affirm the district court's dismissal, I respectfully dissent.
While the complaint is hardly a model of clarity, Howl's general theory comes through well enough. Howl believed, and repeatedly contended, that Medina was the true wrongdoer. He repeatedly implied or outright stated that Medina set him up while working as Officer Alvarado's informant. See, e.g., Aplt. App'x at 21 ("[The] criminal activities . . . were the sole responsibility of Medina."); id. at 23 ("Medina had been in the sole control of the cigarettes all night . . . ."). And Howl repeatedly faulted Officer Alvarado for failing to investigate Medina's potential wrongdoing. See, e.g., id. at 21 ("[Officer] Alvarado . . . allowed [Medina] to walk away from the scene despite the fact that [Howl] told [Officer] Alvarado she had a fire-arm on her and was in possession of dope."); id. at 25 ("Had [Officer] Alvarado done even a cursory investigation in this matter, he would have determined that . . . Howl was one hundred percent innocent of any wrongdoing."). These allegations make no sense if Howl's theory was that Medina  acted in concert with Officer Alvarado: if Officer Alvarado had instructed Medina to plant drugs there would be no reason investigate Medina.
Moreover, Howl never alleged that Medina was acting at Officer Alvarado's behest when she planted the drugs. In fact, the complaint is better read as implying the opposite—that Medina was the one making the decisions. In most of the critical allegations regarding the methamphetamine, Medina is the primary actor, not Officer Alvarado. See, e.g., id. at 21 ("Howl was handed a pack of cigarettes . . . from Medina."); id. at 23 ("Medina had been in the sole control of the cigarettes all night . . . ."). The complaint even goes so far as to say the "criminal activities . . . were the sole responsibility of Medina." Id. at 21. Medina could not have been "solely" responsible for the criminal activities if she was acting at Officer Alvarado's behest.
When read in this context—the repeated emphasis on Medina's responsibility for the drugs, the repeated emphasis on Officer Alvarado's misplaced reliance on information he received from her, and the lack of a contention that Officer Alvarado told Medina to plant the drugs—Howl's allegation that "[Officer] Alvarado intended to falsely arrest and accuse [him]" is best understood as alleging that Officer Alvarado was set on arresting Howl from the beginning because Medina had informed him that Howl was in possession of drugs, see id. at 23 ("[Officer] Alvarado planned on arresting [Howl] for alleged possession of paraphernalia before the stop. . . . Medina was working as an informant for . . . [Officer] Alvarado."), and that the arrest and accusations were "false" because Medina had planted the drugs, see id. at 21 ("[The] criminal activities . . . were the sole responsibility of Medina."). Because the majority fails to place in context Howl's allegation that Officer Alvarado "intended to falsely arrest and accuse [him]," it mistakenly finds this allegation sufficient to allege fabrication on Officer Alvarado's part. Slip Op. at 9.1 
The majority also places considerable weight on Howl's statement in his response to the motion to dismiss that he "was set up for an illegal, wrongful arrest and malicious prosecution by [Officer] Alvarado." Aplt. App'x at 58; see Slip Op. at 10. First, and most fundamentally, this statement does not appear in the complaint. But even considering this statement, it can be read two ways. It can be read as saying Howl was set up by Medina and then wrongfully arrested by Officer Alvarado. Or it can be read as saying that he was both set up and arrested by Officer Alvarado. The majority adopts the latter reading. The majority's interpretation, however, overlooks the preceding sentence, which states that "[Medina] placed the alleged contraband in . . . Howl's pick-up truck and in the cigarette wrapper." Aplt. App'x at 58. When viewed in this context, the first reading is more likely.
The other statements highlighted by the majority are either consistent with or support this understanding. For example, when Howl addressed Malley v. Briggs, 475 U.S. 335, 345, 106 S. Ct. 1092, 89 L. Ed. 2d 271 (1986), in his response to the motion to dismiss, see Slip Op. at 10-11, he did so by specifically referring to what the officer should have known, not what the officer actually knew. Aplt. App'x at 57. Howl's  use of "should have known" rather than "known," bolsters the conclusion that Howl's argument below was that Officer Alvarado should have known Medina planted evidence, not that he already knew.
In the end, the majority fails to draw attention to a single allegation or statement—either in the complaint, or in the proceedings below—where Howl pointed to Officer Alvarado's (as opposed to Medina's) involvement in the fabrication of evidence against him. Without this fabrication theory, Howl has no basis on which to prevail. If Officer Alvarado did not fabricate evidence, then, as the district court concluded, he had probable cause to arrest Howl and is entitled to qualified immunity. See Cortez v. McCauley, 478 F.3d 1108, 1120 (10th Cir. 2007) (en banc) ("[W]hen a warrantless arrest or seizure is the subject of a § 1983 action, the defendant is entitled to qualified immunity if a reasonable officer could have believed that probable cause existed to arrest or detain the plaintiff."); United States v. Swingler, 758 F.2d 477, 487 (10th Cir. 1985) ("The fact that such evidence would not be admissible for the purpose of proving guilt at trial d[oes] not . . . make it unusable as a source of probable cause.").
In sum, the allegations in Howl's complaint simply did not put Officer Alvarado on notice of a fabrication theory. See Robbins v. Oklahoma, 519 F.3d 1242, 1250 (10th Cir. 2008). For these reasons, I would affirm the district court. I respectfully dissent.

 

