.
Today the majority imposes a new duty on plan administrators to notify members "that undistributed, inspectable documents could affect the scope of judicial review." Maj. op. at 10. I disagree with this holding. This new duty placed on plan administrators—to specifically inform members that documents exist that could affect judicial review—is supported neither by the language of ERISA nor our caselaw; it is of the majority's own making. Here, the summary plan description ("SPD") states that members "may ask to examine or receive free copies of all pertinent plan documents, records, and other information relevant to your claim by asking [the plan administrator]." This is sufficient to satisfy the only relevant duty imposed by ERISA here, which is to make a plan "available," and to furnish documents upon request of a plan participant. See 29 U.S.C. § 1024(b)(2), (4). As the majority plainly concedes, the Plan Instrument in this case states that the plan administrator has the "sole discretionary authority" regarding claims. Maj. op. at 4 & n.2. Accordingly, we must affirm the administrator's decision unless it is arbitrary and capricious. See Eugene S. v. Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of N.J., 663 F.3d 1124, 1130 (10th Cir. 2011). The majority instead remands the case to the district court for application of de novo review. For this reason, I respectfully dissent.
There is no statutory duty under ERISA to specifically notify participants of documents that may affect the judicial standard of review of their claims. Rather, ERISA only requires a plan be "ma[d]e available." 29 U.S.C. § 1024(b)(2); see Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. Schoonejongen, 514 U.S. 73, 84, 115 S. Ct. 1223, 131 L. Ed. 2d 94 (1995) ("ERISA requires that every plan administrator make available for inspection . . . all currently operative, governing plan documents." (citing 29 U.S.C. § 1024(b)(2))). Here, the SPD informed plan participants that: "You may ask to examine or receive free copies of all pertinent plan documents, records, and other information relevant to your claim . . . ." Maj. op. at 9. This language, on its face, puts plan participants on notice that other documents could exist and be "relevant to [their] claim," and therefore satisfies the dictates of ERISA.
The majority rejects this approach, however, explaining instead that "Premera didn't disclose the Plan Instrument . . . ." Id. at 8; see also id. at 7 (suggesting that the Plan Instrument was a "secret document locked away by the plan administrator"); id. at 8 (suggesting that plan participants lacked notice because "Premera didn't . . . tell members anything that would have clued them in to the existence of this document."). Indeed, the majority finds that the above-quoted language from the SPD, explaining that "all pertinent documents" may be requested by a plan participant, is too broad because it fails to specifically "suggest the existence of another document affecting judicial review." Id. at 9. As the majority puts it, plan participants must be notified that "undistributed, inspectable documents could affect the scope of judicial review." Id. at 10 (emphasis added). Thus, the majority's approach requires a plan administrator to not only notify members that other documents may exist that might be relevant to their claims, but also to specifically notify them that those other documents may impact review of their claim in the courts.
The fundamental problem with the majority's opinion is that its new notification requirement is not supported by ERISA or our caselaw. The majority cites no statutory language, in ERISA or elsewhere, that imposes a duty on plan administrators to specifically notify members that documents exist that might affect judicial review. The majority cannot cite to a statutory requirement in ERISA's text for this proposition because one does not exist. Under ERISA's disclosure and reporting requirements provision, the statute requires the plan administrator "furnish[]" "(1) a summary plan description," and "(2) the information described in [section 1021(f)], and sections 1024(b)(3) and 1025(a) and (c) of this title." See 29 U.S.C. § 1021(a). ERISA contains a list of the required elements to craft a compliant SPD, but nowhere does that list include notifying participants of the applicable standard of review of their claims. See 29 U.S.C. § 1022 (listing requirements for an ERISA-compliant SPD). And the other statutorily-required disclosures referenced above pertain to the plan's funding and financial data, §§ 1021(f), 1024(b)(3), and annual or quarterly benefit statements of an individual's plan assets, § 1025(a), (c). Today, the majority adds an additional requirement to a plan administrator's disclosure duties under ERISA. Compare 29 U.S.C. § 1021(a), with Maj. op. at 3-11.
The majority cites only one Tenth Circuit case for this notification requirement—Member Services Life Insurance Co. v. American National Bank & Trust Co. of Sapulpa—which stands for the proposition that a plan member "could not be bound to terms of [a] policy of which he had no notice." 130 F.3d 950, 955 (10th Cir. 1997) (quoting Bartlett v. Marietta Operations Support Life Ins., 38 F.3d 514, 517 (10th Cir. 1994)); see Maj. op. at 7, 10. I have no quarrel with this general proposition of contract law, nor with its application in Member Services, which found that a plan member could not be retroactively bound by an amendment that occurred after expenses were incurred and paid. But what I do disagree with is the leap from the proposition that members must be notified that other relevant documents exist and are available upon request, to the very specific requirement that they be notified those documents could affect judicial review. In my view, Member Services simply cannot bear the weight the majority places on it.
The majority's reliance on out-of-circuit caselaw fares no better. For example, the majority cites to Herzberger v. Standard Insurance Co., 205 F.3d 327, 332-33 (7th Cir. 2000), for the proposition that "if the employer is going to reserve a broad, unchanneled discretion to deny claims, the employees should be told about this, and told clearly." Maj. op. at 8. But here, the majority confuses ERISA's notification requirements regarding the availability of pertinent documents with the Supreme Court's judicially-created standard for reserving discretionary authority under a plan.1  See Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. Bruch, 489 U.S. 101, 115, 109 S. Ct. 948, 103 L. Ed. 2d 80 (1989); Eugene S., 663 F.3d at 1130-31 (discussing requirements for reserving discretionary review). There is no question that the Plan Instrument in this case reserves discretionary authority under Eugene S. Maj. op. at 4 & n.2 (noting that "the Plan Instrument creates discretionary authority"); see also Lyn M. v. Premera Blue Cross, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 87524, 2018 WL 2336115 at *4 (D. Utah 2018) (unpublished) (holding that the language, which states that the administrator has "sole discretionary authority," is sufficiently clear). The question in this case is whether notice of that reservation of discretionary authority complied with ERISA, which, in my view, it did.
Significantly, not even the appellants argued for the new notification requirement the majority now imposes. The majority spends a good deal of time arguing that the appellants did in fact contend that notice was lacking in this case. Maj. op. at 5-6 & n.3. However, the appellants never argued that notice was insufficient due to lack of specific language in the governing documents regarding judicial review. In other words, they never argued that they did not receive notice because the plan language failed to state in specific terms that there existed undistributed plan documents that could impact judicial review—that is, the majority's holding today. Instead, in each instance of mentioning notice, the appellants argued that the plan documents failed to give notice because those documents were not distributed.2  But there is no distribution requirement under ERISA. See 29 U.S.C. § 1024(b)(2), (4). Whether an undistributed document may reserve discretionary authority is an open question in this and other circuits.3  If we are to address that question, however, we should do it head-on, rather than through the back door of notification.
Of greatest concern is the fact that the majority's newfound notification requirement lacks a limiting principle. The logic of today's opinion could require, for example, specific notice of a document that might impact claims processing procedures, or to cite another example, a document that might impact how coverage decisions are made. Once specific notice of a document impacting judicial review is required, it is but a short jump to requiring specific notice of documents impacting other participant rights. The majority's approach thus violates the fundamental tenet of ERISA to impose uniform and clear duties upon plan administrators. See Aetna Health v. Davila, 542 U.S. 200, 208, 124 S. Ct. 2488, 159 L. Ed. 2d 312 (2004) ("The purpose of ERISA is to provide a uniform regulatory regime over employee benefit plans.").
Because the plan administrator failed to discharge this newly-imposed duty to specifically inform members that other documents could impact their right to judicial review, the majority refuses to apply the Plan Instrument,4  which plainly states that the plan administrator has the "sole discretionary authority" regarding claims. When a plan administrator reserves such discretion, we must affirm its decision unless it is arbitrary and capricious. Eugene S., 663 F.3d at 1130. The majority instead reverses the district court's decision upholding the administrator's decision made in this case and remands for application of de novo review.5  For this reason, I respectfully dissent from its opinion.

 

