 in part and dissenting in part.
In concluding that Loveall violated the "no contact with any child" condition of his probation, 14  the trial court relied on a notarized letter from a nurse who stated that she saw Loveall at the door of his wife's hospital room and that he told her he was waiting to see his wife and baby. The U.S. Supreme Court has expressly permitted the admission of such letters at probation hearings where "good cause" is shown. Here, the "good cause" standard is satisfied because the notarized letter was sufficiently reliable and because Loveall never denied or otherwise challenged the nurse's description of the incident. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from that portion of the majority's opinion finding that Loveall's due process rights were violated at his probation revocation hearing.
There is no dispute that Loveall was in his wife's hospital room at the same time the baby was in the room; Loveall, his wife, and his wife's grandmother all testified to that fact. 15  There is also no dispute that, according to his own testimony, Loveall knew that he was not to be in the room with the baby. 16  The only question was whether Loveall knowingly placed himself in a situation where prohibited contact with the baby would occur.
As to that issue, Loveall testified that he had fallen asleep in his wife's room and  awakened to find the baby present. See maj. op. at 6. The trial court, however, rejected Loveall's "accidental" contact theory. Specifically, the court concluded that Loveall "clearly had contact with the child when he was in the room and he knew he shouldn't have and he was aware of the violation . . . ." The court pointed to Exhibit 4, a notarized letter from Nancy Mann, a nurse at the hospital. In the letter, Mann stated that she saw Loveall outside his wife's room and asked him if she could help him with anything, and he responded: "I'm here to visit my wife and baby, but I have to wait." (Emphasis added.) The court concluded from this statement that Loveall "was clearly there [outside his wife's room] to visit the baby. It was not contradicted he did in fact make that statement." Importantly, while the majority does not consider the trial court's actual findings, it is clear that the Mann letter was the only hearsay evidence the court relied upon to reach the conclusion that Loveall violated the "no contact" condition. 17  
The U.S. Supreme Court has held that evidence admitted at a probation hearing need not meet the evidentiary requirements of a criminal trial. According to the Court, "the process [for probation revocation] should be flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material that would not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial." Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 489, 92 S. Ct. 2593, 33 L. Ed. 2d 484 (1972) (parole); Gagnon v. Scarpelli, 411 U.S. 778, 782, 93 S. Ct. 1756, 36 L. Ed. 2d 656 & n.5 (1973) (adopting Morrissey in probation context). Under Morrissey and Gagnon, due process requires that the defendant have "the right to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing confrontation)[.]" Morrissey, 408 U.S. at 489. 18  This "good cause" requirement is satisfied when the hearsay evidence in question -- here, the notarized Mann letter -- is deemed sufficiently reliable. See, e.g., United States v. Kelley, 446 F.3d 688, 692-93 (7th Cir. 2005); Kell v. U.S. Parole Comm'n, 26 F.3d 1016, 1020 (10th Cir. 1994); Reyes v. State, 868 N.E.2d 438, 441-43 (Ind. 2007); Harris v. United States, 612 A.2d 198, 201-02 (D.C. 1992). 19  
As applied in this case, the trial court did not err in considering the Mann letter because it was sufficiently reliable. As was established at the hearing, the letter was notarized. While Loveall objected to the letter on the ground that it was hearsay, he did not give any reason to conclude that the letter was of questionable reliability. In fact, when Loveall's counsel sought to contradict the testimony of Loveall's probation officer that Mann saw Loveall holding the baby, he pointed to the fact that the statements in the letter were more reliable than the probation officer's recounting of the conversation because the letter was notarized. And while the majority may be correct that Loveall's use of the letter to support his case does not, as a technical matter, waive his due process objection, maj. op. at 18-19, his use of the letter does demonstrate the fact that he considered the statements in the letter to be reliable. Most importantly, as the trial court pointed out, Loveall never denied making the  statement to Mann or otherwise challenged her description of the incident; nor does he make such a challenge in his appeal to us. 20  See, e.g., United States v. Penn, 721 F.2d 762, 766 (11th Cir. 1982) (finding no abuse of discretion in trial court's admission of hearsay evidence at probation revocation hearing where defendant "d[id] not deny, and did not controvert in any way, the charge that he had had illegal drugs in his body on the specific occasions alleged" but rather sought "to rely on his asserted right to confront and cross-examine the [hearsay declarants]"); Harris, 612 A.2d at 202 (finding no error where court found report from drug treatment program was sufficiently reliable where "appellant never denied using illegal drugs"). In sum, Supreme Court precedent specifically contemplates that letters of this very sort will be admissible in probation hearings, and the trial court properly relied on the Mann letter in this case. See, e.g., United States v. McCallum, 677 F.2d 1024, 1025-26 (4th Cir. 1982) (finding letter from drug treatment provider regarding defendant's drug use to be reliable); Reyes, 868 N.E.2d at 442-43 (finding that hearsay statement in affidavit was reliable, given the expertise and personal knowledge of the affiant); Commonwealth v. Calvo, 41 Mass. App. Ct. 903, 668 N.E.2d 846, 848 (Mass. Ct. App. 1996) (finding that sworn statement by witness with personal knowledge was substantially reliable and therefore admissible in probation revocation proceeding). 21  
The majority does not consider the propriety of the trial court's reliance on the letter. Instead, it suggests that the Morrissey good cause requirement would not apply in this case because Loveall's probation was revoked due to an alleged non-criminal act in violation of a condition of probation, as opposed to an alleged commission of a crime. Maj. op. at 17 (concluding that cross-examination of probation officer is sufficient to satisfy dictates of due process in case involving alleged non-criminal act in violation of probation condition). While the majority's rationale may square conflicting court of appeals precedent, see maj. op. at 15-16, I agree with Justice Coats that it does not square with U.S. Supreme Court precedent, see conc. & dis. op. at 4. 22  In sum, while I believe Loveall's due process rights to confront witnesses required that the proffered hearsay evidence be reliable, I find that those rights are satisfied in this case.
I also take issue with the ultimate basis for the majority's ruling -- namely, that a new revocation hearing is necessary in this case because Loveall was not provided with sufficient notice consistent with due process that the prosecution would introduce the Mann letter at the hearing. I agree with Justice Coats that there is no obligation that the prosecution give notice to the defendant of every piece of hearsay evidence it intends to introduce at the hearing. See conc. & dis. op. at 6; Kell, 26 F.3d at 1022-23 (holding that "in the context of parole revocation, due process does not require advance disclosure of all the information the Commission might consider as a basis for exceeding the [sentencing] guidelines," on the ground that, inter alia, such advance notice "would seem to  entail an extensive pre-revocation hearing review of a parolee's file to identify all information the Commission might [consider]"). 23  
Because I would reverse the court of appeals and reinstate the trial court's revocation of Loveall's probation, I respectfully dissent from that portion of the majority's opinion finding that Loveall's due process rights were violated at his probation revocation hearing.

 

