 in part and dissenting in part.
I agree with the majority that the seizure of Defendant's home was unreasonable. The Fourth Amendment allows for "a temporary seizure [that is] supported by probable cause and . . . designed to prevent the loss of evidence while the police diligently obtai[n] a warrant in a reasonable period of time." Illinois v. McArthur, 531 U.S. 326, 334, 121 S. Ct. 946, 148 L. Ed. 2d 838 (2001). Here, as we conclude today, the seizure was none of those things. I disagree, however, with the majority's decision to go on to determine whether the attenuation and independent source exceptions to the exclusionary rule apply (ultimately deciding that they do not), rather than remanding the case for such a determination. I come to this conclusion for three reasons.
First, although the district court made some passing references to Defendant's consent to the search, it did not consider whether his consent constituted a break in the causal chain under the attenuation doctrine because it did not need to under its understanding of the case — namely, that the initial seizure of the home was reasonable (an understanding we find erroneous today). Nor did the district court find it necessary to consider the independent source doctrine. It is the general practice of this court to remand for determination of such issues, see, e.g., United States v. Carter, 360 F.3d 1235, 1243 (10th Cir. 2004) (concluding that "the district court is better able to address" whether defendant's consent was the product of the preceding illegal search and remanding for such a determination), and indeed the Supreme Court did so, after it declined to recognize a "crime scene exception" to the warrant requirement. Flippo v. West Virginia, 528 U.S. 11, 15, 120 S. Ct. 7, 145 L. Ed. 2d 16 (1999) (per curiam) (remanding for consideration, inter alia, of whether defendant impliedly consented to the search); Maj. Op. at 17 (citing Flippo). I see no reason to depart from this general practice in this case. Thus, while I do not question the court's authority to decide the issues here, I would not exercise our discretion to do so in this case.
Second, the issues of attenuation and independent source received virtually no attention in the briefing before this court. And significantly, to the extent they did receive attention, Defendant urged this court to remand for their determination. See, e.g., Aplt. Br. at 35 (arguing that "[t]he district court should decide, in the first instance, whether Mr. Shrum's consent purged the taint of the unconstitutional seizure"); id. at 42 ("This court should also remand for an additional determination  on the independent-source doctrine").1  The lack of adequate briefing on these issues further convinces me that they are best left to a remand.
Finally, the majority interprets and applies Utah v. Strieff,     U.S.    , 136 S. Ct. 2056, 2061, 195 L. Ed. 2d 400 (2016), the Court's most recent pronouncement on the doctrines of attenuation, independent source, and inevitable discovery — three exceptions to the exclusionary rule that "involve the causal relationship between the unconstitutional act and the discovery of evidence." The majority opinion in this case marks the first time in a published opinion this court has interpreted and applied Strieff. In my view, the better course of action would be to explore the parameters of Strieff in a case in which there is a district court decision on the matter as well as adequate briefing before this court.
For these reasons, I would remand this case to the district court to consider the issues of attenuation and independent source in the first instance. Accordingly, I dissent from that portion of the majority opinion declining to remand the case.

 

