.
The majority reverses the district court's determination denying Delgado-Lopez a minor-role reduction under § 3B1.2(b) because it disapproves of the court's consideration of his financial decisions and his lack of cooperation with the government. Maj. Op. at 8-9. But in my view, even if consideration of these two credibility factors is set aside, there remains sufficient uncontroverted evidence in the record to support the denial. Because I would affirm the district court's decision and not remand the case, I respectfully dissent.
The district court articulated two reasons for its refusal to grant Delgado-Lopez a minor-role reduction. First, the court found it significant that Delgado-Lopez was "entrusted with an extraordinary amount" of drugs. ROA Vol. III at 63. He had transported "13 kilograms of something," which testing revealed to be at least five kilograms of 100% pure methamphetamine. Id.1  Second, the court relied upon the fact that Delgado-Lopez had made four trips for the drug-trafficking organization. See, e.g., id. at 62, 64.2  In sum, Delgado-Lopez was a courier responsible for transporting a large quantity of 100% pure methamphetamine over thousands of miles, and he was a repeat player, having transported drugs across the country on multiple occasions on behalf of the organization. That Delgado-Lopez was responsible for this degree of task was indicative of the "measure of trust that the organization" placed in him. Id. at 64. For these reasons, the district court denied him a minor-role reduction.3 
Our caselaw supports the district court's decision. We have repeatedly highlighted a defendant's involvement in multiple trips on behalf of a criminal organization as an appropriate factor to consider in weighing a minor-role reduction. In United States v. Moreno, for example, we observed the defendant's "repeated drug trips from Phoenix to Kansas City" and transport of "high value cargo—6.6 kilograms of 100% pure methamphetamine" were significant reasons in underscoring his "deep involvement in this drug transaction, as well as his participation in the larger operation." 696 F. App'x 886, 891 (10th Cir. 2017) (unpublished). These factors, in turn, spoke to the defendant's "more than typical" role. Id.; see also United States v. Mendoza, 468 F.3d 1256, 1264 (10th Cir. 2006) (identifying defendant's "three drug-delivery trips" as a basis for affirming district court's denial of the minor-participant reduction). Our sister circuits have also recognized the importance of these factors. See, e.g., United States v. Salas, 752 F. App'x 486, 488 (9th Cir. 2019) (unpublished) (finding that district court did not abuse its discretion by denying a minor-role adjustment "in light of the totality of the circumstances, including [the defendant's] prior successful drug crossings"); United States v. Jimenez, 687 F. App'x 395, 398 (5th Cir. 2017) (unpublished) (calling attention to defendant's admission that he transported drugs "on three other occasions for the same drug trafficking organization" as one of the relevant facts for denying defendant's minor-role adjustment).
The transportation of a large quantity of drugs has been another key factor in considering whether a minor-role reduction was properly denied. In United States v. Funez, for example, we upheld the district court's denial of this adjustment for a defendant who was found with 1,085 grams of methamphetamine. 615 F. App'x 492, 494 (10th Cir. 2015) (unpublished). After noting the district court found the defendant "mov[ed] large amounts of drugs between California and Colorado," we articulated how this court "has found couriers who move large amounts of drugs are quite important to all parties and cannot be characterized as minor participants." Id. at 495 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Then in United States v. Aispuro-Medina, we remarked that "[w]e have declined to hold that drug couriers are minor or minimal participants in drug offenses where they transport particularly large amounts of drugs or money and make repeated trips." 256 F. App'x 215, 221 (10th Cir. 2007) (unpublished) (citation omitted). Accordingly, we affirmed the district court's decision to deny a role reduction after the defendant was found "transporting nearly 10 kilograms of cocaine" and "admitted [to] making three prior trips" as a drug courier. Id. Other courts have found likewise. See, e.g., United States v. Manguila-Paez, 713 F. App'x 316 (5th Cir. 2018) (unpublished) (pointing to the transport and attempted sale of a "large quantity of methamphetamine" as one of the factors the district court properly relied upon); United States v. Corrales-Portillo, 779 F.3d 823, 833-34 (8th Cir. 2015) (affirming the district court's finding that "the large quantity of drugs recovered" indicated defendants "were deeply involved in criminal activity" (internal quotation marks omitted)); United States v. Gonzalez, 534 F.3d 613, 617 (7th Cir. 2008) (observing the criminal organization's "trust[]" in the defendant to "pick up a large quantity of drugs" as one of several factors which supported the conclusion that the defendant's "role in the offense was integral to the operation"); United States v. Barrera, 46 F. App'x 674, 677 (3d Cir. 2002) (unpublished) (highlighting defendant's import of "large quantities of drugs . . . on more than one occasion" as representative of the defendant's "knowledge of the organization's scope and purpose").
The nexus between these two factors—namely, involvement in transporting a large quantity of drugs over the course of multiple trips on behalf of a criminal organization—demonstrates "the nature and extent of the defendant's participation in the commission of the criminal activity," U.S.S.G. § 3B1.2 cmt. n.3(C)(iv). This degree of involvement, in turn, demonstrates the defendant's "role as a trusted and valued member of the drug-trafficking organization." Moreno, 696 F. App'x at 895. That an organization entrusted Delgado-Lopez with a significant amount of methamphetamine and repeated trips across the country speaks to the significance of his role in the organization.
The record reveals further support for the district court's decision.4  It indicates Delgado-Lopez possessed some knowledge regarding "the scope and structure" of the drug-trafficking. U.S.S.G. § 3B1.2 cmt. n.3(C)(i). He knew members of the drug-trafficking organization, residing in Mexico, orchestrated the movement of methamphetamine to him in California before his transport of the drugs to Kansas. Aplt. Br. at 5; see also Aple. Br. at 4. See Moreno, 696 F. App'x at 895 (concluding defendant was aware of the scope and structure of the drug-trafficking activity in part due to his knowledge that the "drugs were imported from Mexico to Arizona and then transported from Arizona to Kansas City"). Delgado-Lopez also retained some "planning" and "decision-making" responsibilities. U.S.S.G. § 3B1.2 cmt. n.3(C)(ii), (iii). He supplied the vehicle used to transport the drugs. ROA Vol. III at 47, 49. There is also indication that Delgado-Lopez chose his travel companion, because he fit the description of a friend and therefore gave credence to the story Delgado-Lopez initially fabricated concerning his travel plans. Aplt. Br. at 7. This court in Moreno identified these two factors as supporting the conclusion that the defendant wielded a degree of planning and decision-making responsibility. 696 F. App'x at 895; see also United States v. Calderon-Porras, 911 F.2d 421, 423 (10th Cir. 1990) (identifying that defendant was not simply a courier, in part, because he "furnished his own automobile for the smuggling operation"). And importantly, Delgado-Lopez was able to decide "how to drive the route," that is, "straight through or to [make] stop[s]." ROA Vol. III at 57.
Significantly, Delgado-Lopez does not dispute any of this record evidence on appeal. Furthermore, we review a district court's denial of the minor-role reduction for clear error. See United States v. Llantada, 815 F.3d 679, 685 (10th Cir. 2016) (citation omitted). For the district court's factual finding that Delgado-Lopez was more than a minor participant to qualify as clearly erroneous, he needs to show it is "more than possibly or even probably wrong; the error must be pellucid to any objective observer." Watson v. United States, 485 F.3d 1100, 1108 (10th Cir. 2007) (citations omitted). Here, Delgado-Lopez does not overcome this hurdle. As detailed above, the district court's decision finds "factual support in the record," United States v. Martinez, 512 F.3d 1268, 1276 (10th Cir. 2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted), and therefore it is not clearly erroneous.
The majority concentrates on the district court's credibility determination—namely, that Delgado-Lopez was not credible—based on his financial decisions and his lack of cooperation with the government.5  Indeed, it considers virtually no other evidence in the record supporting the district court's decision. See Maj. Op. at 12 n.6 (noting, in a footnote, that the district court's consideration of the quantity of drugs involved was appropriate). Yet, even setting aside the district court's discussion of financial decisions and lack of cooperation, its denial of the reduction should still be affirmed.
This court's decision in United States v. Lunnin, 608 F. App'x 649 (10th Cir. 2015) (unpublished), is instructive. There, the district court denied the defendant's request for a minimal-role reduction after mistakenly stating that a "role reduction is something that applies when a defendant is assessed with more than what they were involved with in the conspiracy." Id. at 662. We found it was beyond question that the district court erred in relying on this principle to deny the reduction. See id. ("This language makes clear that, contrary to the conclusion reached by the district court, a defendant such as Lunnin, who was held accountable only for the quantity of drugs that he was personally involved with, is not precluded from receiving an adjustment under § 3B1.2."). Despite this "procedural error," we observed that "[u]nder the law of this circuit, it was [the defendant's] burden at sentencing to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was a minimal participant." Id. at 663 (citation omitted). And the district court "rejected the key fact-based argument made by [the defendant] in support of the minimal-participant reduction." Id. "[E]ven though the district court committed a legal error by misconstruing its authority to impose a reduction under § 3B1.2," id., we affirmed the district court's decision after finding the defendant's actions conveyed "that he understood the scope and structure of the enterprise," id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Notwithstanding the district court's error, we affirmed the denial of this reduction on the basis of supporting record evidence. That is the course we should take in this case. See United States v. Concha, 294 F.3d 1248, 1256 (10th Cir. 2002) (concluding that "when, as here, 'the sentencing decision rested on other permissible factors in addition to the improper factor, and we determine the district court would have imposed the same sentence even in the absence of the improper factor, then we will not disturb the decision'" (quoting United States v. Whiteskunk, 162 F.3d 1244, 1250 (10th Cir. 1998))); United States v. Bowen, 437 F.3d 1009, 1020 (10th Cir. 2006) ("But even if the district court based its ruling on an erroneous conclusion that it was without authority to grant a mitigating role adjustment, remand is unnecessary because [the defendant] failed to demonstrate that he qualified for a mitigating role adjustment."); see also United States v. Nunez, 261 F. App'x 739, 740 (5th Cir. 2008) (unpublished) (affirming district court's denial of minimal-role adjustment under § 3B1.2 after finding that "even if the district court erred," the facts "establish[] that the district court would have imposed the same sentence" (citations omitted)).6 
Remand is not warranted in this case because the record contains ample and uncontroverted evidence to support denying Delgado-Lopez a minor-role reduction. I would affirm.

 

