.
Our precedent states that the exclusion of a witness to remedy a discovery violation should be a "rare" occurrence absent bad faith. United States v. Golyansky, 291 F.3d 1245, 1249 (10th Cir. 2002). In United States v. Gonzales, for example, we concluded that the district court "abused its discretion in imposing what was obviously the most severe available sanction, i.e., complete suppression of the witness' statements and trial testimony" because the sanction was "too severe" under the circumstances. 164 F.3d 1285, 1292 (10th Cir. 1999). In the case before us, however, the majority barely acknowledges this aspect of our caselaw. Indeed, it never considers whether excluding Sherwood was "too severe" a sanction or whether this is the "rare" case in which exclusion is warranted. Instead, it relies upon the dissent in Gonzales that rejected such an analysis and emphasized that "[t]he question before [us] . . . is not whether [exclusion] . . . was the remedy we would have chosen, or even whether we think [exclusion] . . . is unduly harsh." Id. at 1294 (McKay, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (disagreeing with majority's conclusion that the district court abused its discretion in excluding witness); see maj. op. at 15. But assessing whether a sanction is unduly harsh is precisely the inquiry that our precedent requires. See Gonzales, 164 F.3d at 1292 (majority opinion). Because I would apply our governing precedent and find that that this is not a "rare" case and that exclusion was "too severe" a sanction under the circumstances, I respectfully dissent.
As the majority points out, the district court's decision to exclude Sherwood is subject to abuse of discretion review. Maj. op. at 4. In the context of the exclusion of witness testimony, however, we have significantly cabined that discretion. As we stated in Golyansky,
In the absence of a finding of bad faith, the court should impose the least severe sanction that will accomplish prompt and full compliance with the discovery order. The preferred sanction is a continuance. It would be a rare case where, absent bad faith, a district should exclude evidence rather than continue the proceedings.
291 F.3d at 1249 (emphasis added) (citations omitted). As we have recognized, exclusion of a witness is "almost never imposed in the absence of a constitutional violation or statutory authority for such exclusion." United States v. Charley, 189 F.3d 1251, 1262 (10th Cir. 1999) (quotations omitted). In deciding whether exclusion is "the least severe sanction" sufficient to address the violation, Golyansky, 291 F.3d at 1249, the district court should consider three factors: (1) the reason for the delay; (2) the extent of the prejudice to  the party seeking disclosure; and (3) the feasibility of curing the prejudice with a continuance, see maj. op. at 4-5 (citing United States v. Banks, 761 F.3d 1163, 1198-99 (10th Cir. 2014)); see also Gonzales, 164 F.3d at 1292 (considering these factors and concluding that exclusion was "too severe" a sanction and remanding for "consideration of less severe sanctions").
Here, it is undisputed that the failure to list Sherwood as a witness was not motivated by bad faith. Maj. op. at 5. Therefore, the question is whether this was the "rare case" in which exclusion was necessary. I believe the answer to that question is no.
First, the prejudice to Moya was relatively small. As the majority acknowledges, Sherwood's toxicology report was provided to Moya over a year before trial. Maj. op. at 7. Further, Moya retained two experts to challenge Sherwood's findings. App. vol. 1, 190-99 (Dr. Steven Pike); App. vol. 2, 297-307 (Janine Arvizu). Both of these experts challenged Sherwood's findings in their own reports. App. vol. 1, 190-99; App. vol. 2, 297-307. Moreover, Moya listed Sherwood on his list of potential witnesses (later deleting her once the government filed an emergency motion to add her to its list). Compare App. vol. 1, 187-88 (amended witness list; including Sherwood), with id. at 230-31 (second amended witness list; omitting Sherwood). Moya was thus not only familiar with Sherwood's toxicology report, he had retained two experts to take issue with it and had listed her as a potential witness. Under these circumstances, it is difficult to say that the prejudice of nondisclosure was substantial or that Moya would have needed significant time to prepare for cross-examining Sherwood. This case is thus analogous to Charley where we concluded that, although some witnesses had been mislabeled fact witnesses instead of expert witnesses, the defendant did not "suffer[] any prejudice" because the "government turned over to the defense copies of all . . . records from which the witnesses would be testifying." 189 F.3d at 1262.1 
Second, the feasibility of a continuance was not properly considered by the district court. The district court noted that the case had been continued "multiple times" already. App. vol. 2, 312. Indeed, Moya received at least four continuances so that he could retain experts to challenge Sherwood. See App. vol. 1, 121-59, 164-65, 205-23. However, the district court did not explore the feasibility of a continuance. The court noted that that the government "would acquiesce if [Moya] requested a continuance" so that Sherwood could testify, but explained that "[Moya] expressed a clear desire to proceed with the trial as scheduled because it would be quite a challenge to reschedule all the defense witnesses." App. vol. 2, 312. The court went  on to find that it would not grant a continuance because "both parties expressed that they did not want a continuance and [because of] the difficulties inherent in rescheduling the case, along with the Court's own docket." Id.
But the district court's suggestion that the government "did not want a continuance" is inaccurate.2  The government's position was that it did not believe a continuance was necessary given Moya's possession of Sherwood's report, his retention of two witnesses to challenge that report, and the fact that Sherwood had appeared on his witness list. See App. vol. 3 at 407-11; App. vol. 1, 187-88. But there is nothing in the record to suggest that the government preferred exclusion over a continuance if faced with the possibility that Sherwood would not be permitted to testify. Indeed, the government was prepared to accept a continuance if one was necessary to allow Moya to prepare for Sherwood's testimony. Thus, the district court excluded Sherwood's testimony on the ground, not supported by the record, that the government opposed a continuance. The absence of record support for the district court's conclusion in this regard constitutes an abuse of discretion. See Gonzales, 164 F.3d at 1292 (concluding that the district court had abused its discretion in ordering exclusion where there was "no record support whatsoever" for the court's conclusion that a continuance could not cure prejudice to defendants). Stated differently, the district court abused its discretion in this case by not considering whether a continuance could cure any prejudice caused by the government's failure to timely disclose Sherwood. The most that can be said about the district court's assessment of this factor is that it would have been inconvenient to reschedule the trial. Maj. op. at 8 (noting that the district court mentioned its own "docket and scheduling limitations").
More fundamentally, there is nothing in the record to support a finding that this was the "rare" case in which exclusion was a necessary remedy. I do not take issue with the majority's conclusion that there was at least some prejudice to Moya due to the government's failure to timely list Sherwood, and at least some difficulty in rescheduling the trial. Maj. op. at 8, 10, 14. But this would be true in virtually any case involving a discovery violation. The question here is whether this is the "rare" case where a continuance would not be the proper remedy. There is nothing in the record in my view that sets this case apart so as to justify exclusion.
The most troubling aspect of the majority's opinion is its failure to recognize that exclusion is to be the "rare" remedy. As we explained in Gonzales,
we emphasize the Supreme Court has never approved exclusion of evidence as a sanction for government misconduct in the absence of a constitutional violation or statutory authority for such exclusion. Indeed, the Court has emphasized that penalties visited upon the Government, and in turn upon the public, because its officers have violated the law must bear some relation to the purposes which the law is to serve. Here, we are convinced the sanction of total exclusion is too severe and hinders, rather than forwards, the public interest in a full and truthful disclosure of critical facts.
 164 F.3d at 1292 (citations and quotations omitted). As noted above, the majority not only overlooks this caselaw, but relies on the dissent in Gonzales that rejected such an analysis and emphasized that "[t]he question before [us] . . . is not whether [exclusion] . . . was the remedy we would have chosen, or even whether we think [exclusion] . . . is unduly harsh." Gonzales, 164 F.3d at 1294 (McKay, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (disagreeing with majority's conclusion that the district court abused its discretion in excluding witness); see maj. op. at 15. But according to the Gonzales majority opinion, we must assess whether the sanction is too severe. 164 F.3d at 1292-93 (finding exclusion to be "too severe" of a sanction and remanding the case to the district court for "less severe sanctions"). Here, that inquiry into whether exclusion was necessary is an easy one because there is nothing in the record to suggest that a brief continuance would not have cured any prejudice to Moya, or even that a continuance was necessary.
In the end, the majority's basic error, in my view, is to apply an abuse of discretion standard without any recognition that the discretion has been limited. The majority states that "[u]nder this deferential standard of review, 'we will not disturb the ruling unless it is arbitrary, capricious, whimsical[,] or manifestly unreasonable, or we are convinced that the district court made a clear error of judgment or exceeded the bounds of permissible choice in the circumstances.'" Maj. op. at 4 (second alteration in original) (quoting United States v. Banks, 761 F.3d 1163, 1197 (10th Cir. 2014));3  see also maj. op. at 15 (same). Here, I agree with the majority that the district court's decision was not arbitrary, capricious, whimsical, or manifestly unreasonable. It did, however, make a decision that was outside the bounds of permissible choice because our caselaw obliges the court to select "the least severe sanction that will accomplish prompt and full compliance with the discovery order." Golyansky, 291 F.3d at 1249.
Because I would reverse on the ground that the district court abused its discretion in excluding Sherwood's testimony, I do not need to reach the government's second ground for appeal, namely, whether Labay's testimony would violate the Confrontation Clause. I therefore express no view on that issue. For the reasons stated above, I respectfully dissent.

 

