 in part and concurring in the judgment in part.
I agree with the majority that the U.S. Forest Service's (USFS) refusal to remove the mountain goats does not constitute final agency action because the USFS's letter deferred agency action pending future research and data collection regarding the goats' impact. Maj. Op. at 21-25. I would conclude, however, that the USFS's "wait and see" approach also applies to the request to subject the goats to the special use permit process and to prevent future releases by the state. Contra id. at 9-21. Accordingly, I would affirm the district court's decision that final agency action is lacking in its entirety in this case, and thus would not reach the merits.
Assessing whether there is final agency action in this case rests upon how we interpret the August 7, 2015 letter sent by the Chief of the USFS, Thomas L. Tidwell, to the plaintiffs. In the letter, Tidwell states that "the Forest Service is working cooperatively with [the state] to evaluate any resource impacts and to determine an appropriate action, including consideration of removal of the mountain goats from the RNA1  or reduction in herd numbers." App 78 (emphasis added). In other words, the USFS is performing further evaluation of goat impact before it takes "an appropriate action." I read "appropriate action" to leave all three possible actions—removal, regulation, and prevention—on the table. In my view, simply because the sentence specifically states that an "appropriate action" might include the possibility of removal does not exclude regulation and prevention as "appropriate action[s]."
This interpretation is reinforced by the May 12, 2015 letter from Nora B. Rasure, Regional Forester, to the plaintiffs, from which they appealed to Tidwell. In that letter, Rasure expressly lays out the plaintiffs' three requests—namely, "your letter asserts that the [USFS] has authorityto remove the mountain goats that have been transplanted,prevent transplant  of more mountain goats, andrequire [the state] to obtain 'special use authorizations' in order to transplant any more mountain goats, or maintain existing goats, that may be located on [Forest Service land]." App 75. Rasure ends the letter, in a statement echoed by Tidwell, with the following: "Based on the results [of the further research and data collection], the Forest Service will work cooperatively with [the state] to determine an appropriate course of action concerning management of the mountain goats, including whether or not removal or reduction in population objectives is warranted." App 76 (emphasis added). Again, based on the language that defers a decision on an appropriate action, the USFS is adopting a "wait and see" approach as to all options—including removal, regulation, and prevention—regarding the mountain goats.
The district court2  concluded that the Tidwell letter indicated "that before the agency could initiate any action," the USFS had to gather additional data "sufficient to demonstrate agency action was warranted." Dist. Ct. Op. at 6. I agree, and would find that there is no final agency action for us to review in this case. See McKeen v. United States Forest Service, 615 F.3d 1244, 1253 (10th Cir. 2010) ("Pursuant to the APA, we have jurisdiction to review only 'final agency actions'").
In concluding that there is final action regarding permitting, the majority focuses on the second paragraph of the Tidwell letter, which states that:
In our response dated May 12, 2015, [Rasure] stated the Forest Service did not allow or in any way sanction the introduction of mountain goats by the [state]. In fact, the [state] did not release the mountain goats on [USFS] land, and therefore was not using or occupying [USFS] land at the time for the mountain goat release. The mountain goats have strayed onto adjacent [Forest Service] land . . . after they were released on non-Federal land by [the state].
App 77. The majority takes from this that the plaintiffs' "demand [to use the permitting process was] denied; end of discussion." Maj. Op. at 16. But I would not take this as a rejection of using the permitting process, as the majority does. The above-quoted statement follows Tidwell's description of the plaintiffs' concerns, namely, that "the [USFS] is violating Federal law by 'allowing goats in the National Forest and Mount Peale RNA.'" App 77 (emphasis added). Tidwell's response was to deny that the USFS was "allowing goats" on Forest Service land. Granted, Tidwell did point out that goats were not released onto Forest Service land, but instead "strayed" there after their release. But again, this statement is in direct response to the plaintiffs' allegation that the USFS "allowed" goats on Forest Service land. Indeed, the next paragraph of the letter goes on at length to detail the various efforts the USFS made to object to the introduction of mountain goats by the state. Id.3 
More importantly, nowhere does the Tidwell letter refer to the permitting process.4   This silence is perhaps explained by the fact that the plaintiffs' June 13, 2015 letter to Tidwell does not ask for action on permitting. Instead, it requests that the USFS "(1) immediately remove . . . all mountain goats from the La Sal Mountains; and (2) prohibit the [state] from introducing additional goats to the La Sal Mountains." App 325. It then requests a "formal written response . . . indicating that the requested actions will occur" or be denied. Id. Before this court, the USFS does not argue that the permitting claim is unexhausted or waived, but instead suggests it is subsumed in the request for removal—a request on which there is no final action. See USFS Brief at 19 (arguing that the USFS has "deferred ruling on whether the remove or destroy mountain goats or how to regulate them"). To me, this reading best comports with the Tidwell letter. I therefore would hold that the USFS has adopted a "wait and see" approach as to the goats currently on Forest Service land, studying options for action that might include removal or regulation. Permitting is simply one regulatory alternative. See Maj. Op. at 27-28 (listing others).
Whether final agency action exists regarding future releases is a closer call, but I would find it is similarly lacking. The majority finds final agency action in the last paragraph of the Tidwell letter, which states that "your request that the Forest Service prevent [the state] from transplanting goats anywhere in the La Sal Mountains is beyond the control of the Forest Service." App 78. From this statement, the majority concludes that the plaintiffs' "demand [to prevent future releases was] denied; end of discussion." Maj. Op. at 9. But the majority does not consider the sentences that follow, which state that the USFS "has not authorized, and has no plans to authorize, the release of mountain goats on [Forest Service] land in the La Sal Mountains. The [state] has not informed the [USFS] of any additional planned releases." App 78. When read in context, the Tidwell letter suggests that while the USFS believes it has no authority to broadly forbid the state from taking action "anywhere" in the La Sal Mountains, it is keeping its options open for the future. Contrary to the majority's interpretation, then, the letter does not suggest an end of discussion, but rather indicates that such action is not necessary at this time because USFS is not aware of any planned releases.
At the very least, the USFS's response—that the agency has no authority  to prevent goat transplantation "anywhere" in the La Sal Mountains, but there is no immediate need for such prevention given that the state has not indicated it will be introducing goats in the near future—is unclear. The plaintiffs bear the burden of showing finality. Col. Farm Bur. Fed'n v. U.S. Forest Service, 220 F.3d 1171, 1173 (10th Cir. 2000) ("Plaintiffs have the burden of identifying specific federal conduct and explaining how it is 'final agency action' within the meaning of [the APA]."). Given the lack of clarity regarding the USFS's response, I would find that the plaintiffs have not met their burden to show final agency action regarding future releases.
In sum, the USFS informed the plaintiffs that it would have to further evaluate the impact that the goats were having before deciding to take "an appropriate action," whatever that may be. As the district court put it, the USFS "has [not] decided that it will never act on Plaintiffs' requests. The State acted and now the [USFS] is in the reactionary position attempting to determine what agency action, if any, is warranted." Dist. Ct. Op. at 10. Under the circumstances, the USFS's decision to further study the impact that the mountain goats are having on the RNA before taking any action is "tentative [and] interlocutory [in] nature," and therefore not a final agency decision. U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs v. Hawkes Co., 136 S. Ct. 1807, 1813, 195 L. Ed. 2d 77 (2016). Accordingly, I would affirm the dismissal of the case in its entirety, and not reach the merits of the plaintiffs' claims.5 

 

