
I respectfully dissent from the Court's order granting Ms. Andres' emergency motion for a stay of removal.
Ms. Andres filed an emergency stay motion pending her appeal to this Court. The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) dismissed her earlier appeal of an Immigration Judge's (IJ) denial of her application for asylum, withholding of removal, and deferral of removal under the Convention Against Torture. Ms. Andres claims that she came to the United States after being targeted in Guatemala for her political activities pertaining to the land rights of indigenous people. After a hearing, the IJ found that Ms. Andres had failed to establish past persecution or a well-founded fear of future persecution and denied her petition, and the BIA subsequently dismissed her appeal. In her motion to us, Ms. Andres claims (1) that she is likely to succeed on the merits of her appeal and (2) that the IJ improperly failed to consider testimony from an expert witness on indigenous land rights.
To obtain a stay of removal, Ms. Andres must show (among other things) that she has a substantial likelihood of success on the merits of her appeal and that she will suffer irreparable injury in the absence of a stay. Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434, 129 S. Ct. 1749, 173 L. Ed. 2d 550 (2009). If I were at liberty to consider Ms. Andres' asylum claim de novo, I might conclude that she had demonstrated the required substantial likelihood of success. But I am not, and so I cannot. Under well-established circuit precedent, we can grant relief only "when the record compels a reversal" of the BIA's decision. Sanchez Jimenez v. U.S. Atty. Gen., 492 F.3d 1223, 1230 (11th Cir. 2007) (emphasis added) (quotation omitted). In my view, the record here in no way "compels" a determination that the IJ and BIA were wrong to deny Ms. Andres' application.
First, Ms. Andres failed to establish that she was specifically targeted for her political activities in Guatemala or that she has a well-founded fear of future persecution. Persecution, we have repeatedly said, is an "extreme concept, requiring more than a few isolated incidents of verbal harassment or intimidation." Id. at 1232. Here, Ms. Andres alleges that while in Guatemala, she was in a large crowd protesting when anti-indigenous groups began shooting randomly into the mass of people. Ms. Andres herself was uninjured and escaped, and neither she nor anyone in her immediate family was harmed during the ten months following the incident and prior to her arrival in the United States. Although Ms. Andres testified that she was threatened, she provided little evidence about the nature of those threats or whether any of them occurred in person. Her experience stands in stark contrast to the persecution that we deemed sufficient in Sanchez Jiminez, where a father and daughter were specifically targeted by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC) through repeated phone calls, an attempted kidnapping, and an attempted murder. Id. at 1229. None of this is to minimize the horror that Ms. Andres suffered, but simply to underscore that the evidence here does not in my view "compel" the conclusion that the IJ's and BIA's decisions are insupportable.
Second, Ms. Andres has failed to show that the IJ's exclusion of her expert witness—even if erroneous—caused her substantial prejudice. See Lapaix v. U.S. Atty. Gen, 605 F.3d 1138, 1143 (11th Cir. 2010). To show the requisite prejudice, Ms. Andres must demonstrate that "in the absence of the alleged violations, the outcome of [her] proceeding would have been different." Id. To do this, Ms. Andres would have had to submit some evidence—an affidavit, a declaration, a proffer, etc.—explaining what her expert's testimony would have been. She failed to do so. Without having any idea what the expert would have said—let alone that it would have changed the IJ's mind—I simply cannot conclude that Ms. Andres suffered any prejudice.

 

