
About 20 years ago now, an insightful (and hilarious) lawyer friend of mine said to me—and because this is a family show, I'll clean it up a bit—"Not everything that s[tink]s violates the Constitution." If ever a case proved the truth of that little nugget, this is it.
 I  
A
First things first. What happened to Hillcrest here was pretty doggone s[tink]y. In short: Hillcrest is the fee-simple owner of 16.5 acres of commercially zoned land that fronts State Road 52 in Pasco County, Florida. Desiring to put the land to good (and presumably profitable) use, Hillcrest sought a permit to develop its property to include a retail shopping center and additional commercial space. Despite the fact that the County's own "Comprehensive Plan" described State Road 52 and the adjacent areas as having an "acceptable level of roadway surface," Hillcrest was told that in order to obtain the permit, it would have to give the County a 50-foot strip of land—70,000 square feet total—to accommodate the road's future widening. Hillcrest accordingly revised its site plan to account for the 50-foot corridor. Just a few months later, though, having been notified that the Florida DOT might want to shift the road's path, the County demanded that Hillcrest hand over an additional 90-foot band, bringing the required dedication's grand total to 196,000 square feet—4.5 acres, more than a quarter of Hillcrest's total parcel. Over the course of the next few years, the parties continued to haggle, the County continued to deny Hillcrest's construction permits, and Hillcrest—presumably feeling like it was trapped in some Ayn-Rand-ian nightmare—eventually sued.
Sounds like a job for the Takings Clause, right? That provision states that "private property" may not be "taken for public use . . . without just compensation," U.S. Const. amend. V, and has been interpreted to prohibit the government from conditioning a development permit on a land exaction absent solid proof that the exaction both (1) bears an "essential nexus" and (2) "is related both in nature and extent" to the proposed development's impact. See Nollan v. California Coastal Comm'n, 483 U.S. 825, 834-37, 107 S. Ct. 3141, 97 L. Ed. 2d 677 (1987); Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374, 391, 114 S. Ct. 2309, 129 L. Ed. 2d 304 (1994). Unsurprisingly, in its original complaint, Hillcrest alleged (among other causes of action) takings claims under both the United States and Florida Constitutions, asserting that the "required set aside and dedication amount[ed] to an uncompensated taking of private property for public use requiring the County to pay Hillcrest just compensation." For support, Hillcrest cited Nollan and Dolan as indicative of the Supreme Court's "concern with," among other things, the "extortionate leveraging of the police power by local government to obtain concessions from landowners that the government would otherwise have to pay for itself."
Hillcrest's takings-based claims, though, never saw the light of day. Hillcrest initially moved to abate its federal takings claim, acknowledging that it first had to "pursue adequate state procedures for seeking just compensation" under Williamson County Regional Planning Commission v. Hamilton Bank, 473 U.S. 172, 105 S. Ct. 3108, 87 L. Ed. 2d 126 (1985). Then, in conjunction  with that exhaustion-of-remedies process, Hillcrest filed an amended federal complaint from which it dropped its Fifth Amendment takings claim. Several years later, the parties entered into a partial settlement agreement pursuant to which Pasco County agreed to pay Hillcrest $4.7 million to resolve the takings-based claims.
Meanwhile, the federal-court litigation—minus the Takings Clause allegation—chugged ahead, with Hillcrest continuing to press what, to my mind, was the exact same claim parading under a different banner: "substantive due process." And the district court let it. By permitting Hillcrest to invoke substantive due process to pursue what was in substance a Takings Clause claim—a claim that, for its own reasons, Hillcrest had dropped from the lawsuit and would eventually settle for good money—the district court clearly erred.
 B
The district court was (understandably) disgusted by the County's treatment of Hillcrest. Beginning with the summary judgment hearing, the district court expressed profound "discomfort" with Pasco County's conduct. It just "doesn't sit well," the court said. "You look at this and it's disturbing and you think, this is just not right. Something—somewhere this is flawed, whether [or not] you know, the theories happen to fit it." In the end, the court concluded: "As I sit here, I don't quite know whether [the case] fits in any of these [constitutional] slots that [the lawyers] have laid out, but I'm not sure it shouldn't . . . . And I'm not sure that if it doesn't fit into one of them that I'm not going to find the one it's closest to and give the Circuit Court of Appeals an opportunity to say that it should land there." Memorializing its disgust—and reasoning—in a written order, the district court held:
Another judge might find . . . this opinion inexact in this or that particular of constitutional law. Nonetheless, this Ordinance [pursuant to which the County demanded the exaction] is an unmistakable, abusive, and coercive misapplication of governmental power, perpetrated to cynically evade the Constitution. The Ordinance cannot stand, whether for the precise reasons stated here or for a related reason.
Translation: What Pasco County did here s[tink]s to high heaven; ergo, it must be unconstitutional—if not under the Takings Clause, because Hillcrest's takings-based claim had evaporated with its amended complaint, then on some (any) other basis. The basis that the district court chose—the constitutional "slot[]" into which it slid Hillcrest's case—was substantive due process.
That's not how constitutional law works. Whatever other role substantive-due-process doctrine may play, it is not a stand-in for a failed, forfeited, or (even worse) settled Takings Clause claim. The district court should have seen this case for what it is: a not-so-veiled attempt to revive its dropped (and eventually settled) Takings Clause claim and to infuse it with new substantive-due-process life. The fact that Hillcrest sought to do so—and that the district court let it, relying on substantive-due-process doctrine as a failsafe for remedying actions that "do[n't] sit well" or that are "just not right," speaks volumes about the doctrine's slipperiness.
 C  
1
Substantive due process, of course, has been criticized by a wide variety of people for a wide variety of reasons. First, and most obviously, there's the pesky issue of constitutional text. As John Hart Ely colorfully  remarked, "there is simply no avoiding the fact that the word that follows 'due' is 'process.'" John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust: A Theory of Judicial Review 18 (1980). "[W]e apparently need periodic reminding," he said—providing the reminder—"that 'substantive due process' is a contradiction in terms—sort of like 'green pastel redness.'" Id. Others—from one end of the jurisprudential spectrum to the other—have made the same basic observation. See, e.g., United States v. Carlton, 512 U.S. 26, 39, 114 S. Ct. 2018, 129 L. Ed. 2d 22 (1994) (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment) (calling substantive due process "an oxymoron"); Laurence H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law § 7-5, at 1317 (3d ed. 2000) (referring to "the textual gymnastics arguably necessary to find protection of substantive rights in a provision whose words seem most apparently concerned with process").
Second, there's the matter of history. The best indications are that those who framed the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause envisioned it as a guarantee (as its phrasing and moniker indicate) of fair process, not a font of substantive rights. During the floor debates on the Fourteenth Amendment, Congressman John Bingham—the principal draftsman of the Amendment's Section 1—responded to a question about the meaning of the Due Process Clause: "[T]he courts have settled that long ago, and the gentleman can go and read their decisions." Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 2d Sess. 1089 (1866). The most prominent of those "decisions" was undoubtedly Murray's Lessee v. Hoboken Land & Improvement Co., 59 U.S. (18 How.) 272, 15 L. Ed. 372 (1855), which the Supreme Court decided in 1856 and which, just a decade later, was the definitive statement on the meaning of the phrase "due process of law." The Court there construed the materially identical terms of the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause solely in procedural terms. Specifically, the Court said:
To what principles, then, are we to resort to ascertain whether this process, enacted by congress, is due process? To this the answer must be twofold. We must examine the constitution itself, to see whether this process be in conflict with any of its provisions. If not found to be so, we must look to those settled usages and modes of proceeding existing in the common and statute law of England, before the emigration of our ancestors . . . .
Id. at 276-77 (emphasis added); see also, e.g., Akhil Reed Amar, The Bill of Rights: Creation and Reconstruction 173 (1998) (describing Murray's Lessee as a "procedural due process" case).
Third, pedigree. At least in the Supreme Court, substantive-due-process doctrine traces its roots to the fateful—and repugnant—decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. (19 How.) 393, 15 L. Ed. 691 (1857). Invalidating the Missouri Compromise as violative of the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause, the Court observed that "an Act of Congress which deprives a citizen of the United States of his liberty or property, merely because he came himself or brought his property"—which was to say, another human being—"into a particular Territory of the United States, and who had committed no offen[s]e against the laws, could hardly be dignified with the name of due process of law." Id. at 450. Tellingly, the Court voiced no particular objection to the procedures by which Congress had enacted the Missouri Compromise; rather, it simply concluded that, somehow or another, the substance of the act must have infringed a white man's "right" to own a black man. Yuck. Fast forward about half a century and you arrive at a second pillar of substantive-due-process jurisprudence, Lochner v. New  York, 198 U.S. 45, 25 S. Ct. 539, 49 L. Ed. 937 (1905). There, the Court invalidated a state statute establishing maximum work hours for bakers as violating the "general right to make a contract in relation to . . . business." Id. at 53. Again, the procedures employed in enacting the law were just fine; even so, the Court held that the law was substantively unreasonable and, therefore, that it simply had to be unconstitutional. Double yuck.
Finally, in addition to the textual, historical, and ancestral difficulties that plague modern substantive-due-process jurisprudence, the Supreme Court has also emphasized a very real practical problem: The "guideposts for responsible decisionmaking in this unchartered area are scarce and open-ended." Collins v. City of Harker Heights, 503 U.S. 115, 125, 112 S. Ct. 1061, 117 L. Ed. 2d 261 (1992). Put simply, there is always a risk that a court asked to recognize a substantive-due-process violation—but without traditional interpretive guardrails—will simply read into the Constitution its own view of good government. Accordingly, the Supreme Court has emphasized, "[t]he doctrine of judicial self-restraint requires us to exercise the utmost care whenever we are asked to break new ground in this field." Id.
 2
One important way in which the Supreme Court has set out to "restrain[]" substantive-due-process decisionmaking—significant for present purposes—is by holding, repeatedly, that "[w]here a particular Amendment 'provides an explicit textual source of constitutional protection' against a particular sort of government behavior, 'that Amendment, not the more generalized notion of "substantive due process," must be the guide for analyzing these claims.'" Albright v. Oliver, 510 U.S. 266, 273-74, 114 S. Ct. 807, 127 L. Ed. 2d 114 (1994) (plurality) (quoting Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 395, 109 S. Ct. 1865, 104 L. Ed. 2d 443 (1989)). Put slightly differently, "if a constitutional claim is covered by a specific provision"—the Fourth Amendment, the Eighth Amendment, etc.—"the claim must be analyzed under the standard appropriate to that specific provision, not under the rubric of substantive due process." United States v. Lanier, 520 U.S. 259, 272 n.7, 117 S. Ct. 1219, 137 L. Ed. 2d 432 (1997). More specifically, and more pertinently here, substantive due process "cannot" "do the work of the Takings Clause." Stop the Beach Renourishment, Inc. v. Florida Dep't of Envtl. Prot., 560 U.S. 702, 721, 130 S. Ct. 2592, 177 L. Ed. 2d 184 (2010) (plurality) (citing Albright and Graham).
Bottom line: Whatever its proper office—and, as noted, there's plenty of debate about that—substantive due process does not exist to duplicate (or insure, as it were) claims appropriately pursued under other constitutional guarantees. If a claim properly fits within a specific constitutional provision, then it must rise or fall on the doctrine that applies to that provision. If (for whatever reason) the claim can't proceed in its natural textual and doctrinal "home," then, well, it can't proceed. The claimant can't just repackage it in substantive-due-process garb and attempt to relitigate it.
In that respect at least, this case represents substantive due process at its abject worst. At its core, this has always—always—been a Fifth Amendment Takings Clause case. Hillcrest contests Pasco County's insistence that, as the price for developing its roadside parcel, it surrender 196,000 square feet—some 4 1/2 acres—of its land. Put simply, Hillcrest's is a "land-use exaction" claim—which, as the Supreme Court has clarified, is one of the quintessential means by which "a plaintiff [can] challenge a government regulation as an uncompensated taking of private property"  under the Fifth Amendment. Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 544 U.S. 528, 548, 125 S. Ct. 2074, 161 L. Ed. 2d 876 (2005).
But don't just take my word for it. Listen to how the magistrate judge and the district court described Hillcrest's arguments. To begin, the magistrate judge—even while resolving the case on substantive-due-process grounds—summarized the nub of Hillcrest's position as based in Takings Clause principles:
Hillcrest maintained that the dedication requirement resulted in an unconstitutional taking of its property and that it should be compensated for the 140-foot clear space it is required to dedicate to the County in exchange for its development permit/order. When the parties failed to resolve the dispute over compensation, this suit was filed.
R. & R., Doc. 168 at 14 (emphasis added). Explaining what he viewed as the constitutional infirmity, the magistrate said that Ordinance No. 11-15 "compelled [landowners] to surrender private property without compensation as a condition of development approval or permitting." Id. at 26 (emphasis added). The Ordinance's "dedication provision," he continued, "is no mere regulation of land use but rather a calculated measure by the County to avoid the burdens and costs of eminent domain and take private property without just compensation." Id. at 26-27 (emphasis added). The Ordinance, the magistrate held, "commands that certain landowners be forced 'to bear the public burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a whole,' the very thing the Takings Clause of the United States Constitution and the equivalent provision of the Florida Constitution are intended to prevent." Id. at 27-28 (emphasis added).
Tellingly, throughout his report—and to support his conclusion that the Ordinance violates substantive due process—the magistrate judge relied on the Supreme Court's decisions in Nollan v. California Coastal Commission, 483 U.S. 825, 107 S. Ct. 3141, 97 L. Ed. 2d 677 (1987), and Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374, 114 S. Ct. 2309, 129 L. Ed. 2d 304 (1994), both of which, as already explained, addressed the constitutionality of land-use exactions under the Takings Clause. See Doc. 168 at 15-16, 17, 24-25, 27, 29. The magistrate judge said (vaguely) that "[w]hile Nollan and Dolan do not set forth the applicable standard"—presumably because they are Takings Clause cases—they "help inform the due process analysis." Id. at 25. Notably, however, when it came to explaining precisely why the Ordinance violated substantive-due-process principles, the magistrate judge reverted back to a takings-based analysis: "[T]he scheme itself violates due process because it is inconsistent with, and permits the County to avoid its obligations under, the Takings Clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution and Article X, Section 6 of the Florida Constitution." Id. at 29 (emphasis added).
The district court's decision delivered more of the same. On the very first page of its order, that court criticized Ordinance No. 11-15 as part of "a most uncommon regulatory regime" designed "to avoid the payment of 'just compensation' after acquiring . . . necessary land by eminent domain." Order adopting R. & R., Doc. 196 at 1 (emphasis added). In particular, the court said: "[T]o avoid the nettlesome payment of 'just compensation,' the Ordinance empowers Pasco County to purposefully leverage the permitting power to compel a landowner to dedicate land encroached by a transportation corridor. In Pasco County, if there is no free dedication, there is no permit." Id. at 2 (emphasis added). Perhaps most revealingly, the district court observed, even while noting that by the time that it issued its order Hillcrest was "assert[ing] no federal takings claim,"  that "Hillcrest's core argument invokes two United States Supreme Court cases"—yes, Nollan and Dolan—"that consider whether a government's requiring land in exchange for development approval violates the Fifth Amendment's Takings Clause, applied to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment." Id. at 14-15 (emphasis added). Indeed, the district court went so far as to conclude that "[u]nder the Takings Clause the infirmity of the Ordinance is clear," id. at 35, and, further, that "an exaction athwart Nollan and Dolan results in an uncompensated taking and not a deprivation of due process," id. at 37 (emphasis added). What made this case "different," the court said—what took it out of the Takings Clause bucket and put it into the substantive-due-process bucket—was that here, "by legislative fiat, Pasco County use[d] a development permit to compel a landowner either to convey valuable land for free or to submit to a regime castigated by Dolan," and thereby "wield[ed] the police power to compel a landowner's abandoning rights guaranteed by the Takings Clause." Id. I'll have to confess that I'm having a hard time seeing the doctrinal space—between where the Takings Clause leaves off and substantive-due-process doctrine picks up—that the district court found conclusive.
Tellingly, even in its appellate brief Hillcrest continues to focus on takings-based arguments, asserting time and again—buttressed by citations to Nollan and Dolan—that Ordinance No. 11-15 deprives it of "the right to be compensated for a taking." Br. for Appellees at 27; see also id. at 33, 37 (same); id. at 39 (contending that the County violated Hillcrest's fundamental right to be free of "extortionate, arbitrary[,] and irrational regulation and to be compensated for taking of property"). To be sure, Hillcrest now contends that Nollan and Dolan were not Takings Clause cases per se, but rather "unconstitutional conditions" cases. And it's true that both decisions involved the unconstitutional-conditions doctrine. But as any faithful reading will attest, both fundamentally implicated landowners' rights under the Takings Clause.
Again, rather than telling, I'll show. In Nollan, for instance, the Supreme Court framed the question as whether, consistent with "the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment," a state agency "could condition its grant of permission to rebuild [a] house on [the homeowners'] transfer to the public of an easement across their beachfront property." 483 U.S. at 827. The Court observed that if the state had required the homeowners to grant the easement outright there is "no doubt there would have been a taking." Id. at 831. "[C]onditioning their permit to rebuild their house on their agreeing" to the easement did not "alter[] the outcome," the Court held, because there was no "essential nexus" between the projected impact of constructing a larger house—e.g., obstructed views from the road—and the exaction demanded of the homeowners—i.e., an easement that would allow the public to cross their property along the water's edge. Id. at 834-37. Takings Clause, through and through.
Similarly, in Dolan, the Court considered the question whether, under the Takings Clause, a city "could condition the approval of [a business owner's] building permit on the dedication of a portion of her property for flood control and traffic improvements"—and, in particular, the question of "the required degree of connection between the exactions imposed by the city and the projected impacts of the proposed development." 512 U.S. at 377. The Court opened its analysis by quoting the Takings Clause in full and reiterating (just as Hillcrest and district court have here, see Doc. 196 at 24; Br. for Appellees at 14) that "[o]ne of the principal purposes of the Takings Clause is  'to bar Government from forcing some people alone to bear public burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a whole.'" Id. at 384 (quoting Armstrong v. United States, 364 U.S. 40, 49, 80 S. Ct. 1563, 4 L. Ed. 2d 1554 (1960)). The Court held that before a government agency can condition a building permit on a property owner's dedication of a portion of her parcel, it must, in order to comply with "the Fifth Amendment," make "some sort of individualized determination that the required dedication is related both in nature and extent to the impact of the proposed development." Id. at 391.
So let's be clear: Nollan and Dolan—the linchpins of the magistrate judge's R&R, the district court's decision, and Hillcrest's argument on appeal—are Takings Clause cases. As the Supreme Court subsequently summarized in Lingle, "[b]oth Nollan and Dolan involved Fifth Amendment takings challenges to adjudicative land-use exactions—specifically, government demands that a landowner dedicate an easement allowing public access to her property as a condition of obtaining a development permit." 544 U.S. at 546. That description pretty much precisely captures this case: Just like the plaintiffs in Nollan and Dolan, Hillcrest is complaining that Pasco County has required it to relinquish a portion of its property as a condition for obtaining a development permit.
* * *
Back to the beginning, then: Why aren't we talking about the Takings Clause? And why are we talking about substantive due process? Because although Hillcrest initially brought a takings claim, it then dismissed that claim (pending the resolution of parallel litigation in state court) and then eventually settled it for $4.7 million. Having done so, Hillcrest now wants a second bite at the apple—in essence, a chance to recover again—under the auspices of substantive due process. No way.
The way I see it, Hillcrest's substantive-due-process claim fails as a matter of law because, whatever else it may currently be permitted to do, substantive-due-process doctrine cannot be permitted to stand in for a failed or forfeited Takings Clause claim. And it certainly can't be deployed to allow a litigant to double-dip and cash in on a takings claim and then relitigate what is for all intents and purposes the exact same claim under another label.
Accordingly, albeit by a different route, I too conclude that the district court's decision must be reversed.
 II
Having explained my own reasons for concluding that Hillcrest's substantive-due-process claim fails as a matter of law, let me briefly explain a reservation that I have about one of the key "moves" that underlies the majority's analysis. To be clear, I think the majority has it exactly right under our existing precedent. I'm just not convinced that our precedent has it exactly right.
The majority first holds, in Part III.A. of its opinion, that the property interest asserted by Hillcrest here—a "land-use claim"—is a mere "state-created right" that doesn't warrant heightened constitutional protection. Maj. Op. at 11. Under our decisions in DeKalb Stone, Inc. v. County of DeKalb, 106 F.3d 956 (11th Cir. 1997) (per curiam), and Greenbriar Village, L.L.C. v. Mountain Brook, 345 F.3d 1258 (11th Cir. 2003) (per curiam)—the latter of which is effectively on point—I'm convinced the majority is correct about that.17  Having so concluded, the majority  then proceeds, in Part III.B., to reiterate and enforce what we have called the "crucial . . . distinction"—first recognized in McKinney v. Pate, 20 F.3d 1550, 1557 (11th Cir. 1994) (en banc)—"between 'legislative' acts and 'non-legislative' or 'executive' acts." Maj. Op. at 16 (quoting McKinney, 20 F.3d at 1557 n.9). It's this legislative-executive distinction that I'd like to address briefly.
In short, the distinction (as accurately summarized by the majority) is as follows: "When [a person's] 'state-created rights are infringed by "legislative act," the substantive component of the Due Process Clause generally protects that person from arbitrary and irrational government action.'" Maj. Op. at 15 (citations omitted). When, by contrast, a state-created right is violated by executive act, the Due Process Clause provides no substantive protection—even against arbitrary and irrational government conduct. Because the County's permit-denying conduct here was "quintessentially executive action," the majority concludes, Hillcrest has no claim "regardless of how arbitrarily or irrationally the County has acted." Id. at 19, 22.
I agree that Hillcrest is challenging non-legislative, executive conduct here—it's pressing an as-applied claim against the enforcement of Ordinance No. 11-15. Accordingly, I also agree that under our precedent Hillcrest enjoys no substantive-due-process protection. And of course I've already confessed my view that substantive due process is a dubious doctrine that should be cabined, not expanded. Having said that, though, I further confess that I don't fully understand the distinction that we've drawn between legislative and executive action.
We initially articulated the distinction—in a footnote—in McKinney. "Executive acts," we explained, "characteristically apply to a limited number of persons (and often to only one person)." 20 F.3d at 1557 n.9. They "typically arise," we said, "from the ministerial or administrative activities of members of the executive branch." Id. "Legislative acts, on the other hand, generally apply to a larger segment of—if not all of—society; laws and broad-ranging executive regulations are the most common examples." Id. In the years since McKinney, we have repeated (and repeated and repeated—but without further explaining) this distinction between legislative and executive acts. See, e.g., Kentner v. City of Sanibel, 750 F.3d 1274, 1279-80 (11th Cir. 2014); Lewis v. Brown, 409 F.3d 1271, 1273 (11th Cir. 2005); Greenbriar, 345 F.3d at 1263; DeKalb Stone, 106 F.3d at 959-60.
I have no real quarrel with the way we defined and categorized legislative and executive actions in McKinney. I agree that, in the main, legislative acts apply generally to (and across) a broad swath of people, whereas executive acts are aimed at only one or a few. What I don't understand is why we should think that the Constitution provides less protection against executive than legislative infringements. There's certainly no textual basis for the distinction; the Due Process Clause says that no "state"—presumably meaning any branch thereof—shall "deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of  law." U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1. Nor, so far as I'm aware, have we ever tried to justify the legislative-executive distinction on historical grounds. And worse, as a practical matter, the distinction that we've drawn—such that the Clause protects against arbitrary and irrational legislative acts, but not against abusive executive conduct—arguably gets matters precisely backwards. As between the two, it seems to me, executive action—which, by its nature, is individual, targeted, and one-off, rather than broadly and generally applicable—holds the greater potential for abuse. If a piece of arbitrary legislation threatens to gore many oxen at once, the ox owners have a fighting chance of exercising enough political muscle to stop it; the lonely individual whose ox is gored by abusive executive action has next to none.
And while it may be true that executive acts "typically" arise from "ministerial or administrative" undertakings, they can also entail exercises of substantial discretion. This is a case in point. Though perhaps not quite boundless, it's clear that the County's Development Review Committee has wide latitude in the way that it enforces and effectuates Ordinance No. 11-15. As the magistrate judge noted in his R&R, "[t]he DRC has the [sole] authority to approve preliminary site plans, place conditions on such approval, and to exact right-of-ways" under the Ordinance. So too, the DRC alone decides whether a property owner has sufficiently proven that the dedication isn't "roughly proportional" to the development's likely transportation impacts, and accordingly, whether to compensate the owner or grant a waiver. As this sad story demonstrates, the sweeping discretion given to the DRC creates the very real threat of arbitrary and abusive decisionmaking at every step of the permitting process.18 
 Again, though, this question—whether it makes sense to subject legislative but not executive action to (even minimal) scrutiny under the substantive component of the Due Process Clause—is one for another day. Today, McKinney controls, and (rightly or wrongly) that decision clearly holds, as the majority summarizes, that "executive action never gives rise to a substantive-due-process claim unless it infringes on a fundamental right." Maj. Op. at 2 (emphasis added). Under our precedent, Hillcrest's challenge to the Ordinance's application here does not implicate any fundamental right, and it clearly assails executive action. Accordingly, just as the majority says, its claim is DOA.
 III
For the foregoing reasons, I concur in the judgment of reversal.

 

