
I agree that, in the "circumstances" that he confronted, the Fourth Amendment permitted Officer Williams to seize the bullet that he felt in Johnson's pocket, see Majority Op. at 9-10, and I therefore join the Court's opinion. I write separately to clarify that if it were up to me, rather than tying that judgment to the particular situation faced by the particular officer in this particular case, I would simply hold, as a prophylactic matter, that if a policeman discovers a bullet during the course of an otherwise-lawful Terry stop, he can seize it as a means of "neutraliz[ing] the threat" to himself and others. Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 30, 88 S. Ct. 1868, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889 (1968).
My concern with a fact-bound "totality-of-the-circumstances" approach is simply stated: It can leave police officers guessing—and thus potentially hesitant, and thus potentially vulnerable. The majority enumerates a variety of factors that it says justified Officer Williams's determination that seizing the bullet was appropriate here: (1) it was 4:00 a.m.; (2) he was patrolling a "high-crime area"; (3) he had answered a call about a potentially violent residential burglary; (4) he encountered Johnson "in a dark alley"; and (5) "the scene was not yet secure." Majority Op. at 10. That all seems perfectly sensible to me. And more than just sensible, given my understanding of Terry it also seems perfectly correct: In the light of the particular situation that he faced—or the dark of it, as the case may be—Officer Williams reasonably concluded that there was a sufficient threat to his (and others') safety to warrant confiscating the bullet.
In fairness, though, the dissent also has a totality-of-the-circumstances story to tell. It highlights the following "combination of facts" known to Officer Williams before he frisked Johnson: "(1) there had been no report or indication of a weapon or an accomplice at the scene; (2) at least two other armed officers had arrived at the scene; (3) Mr. Johnson had immediately, peacefully, and at gunpoint complied with the officers' commands; and (4) the officers had placed Mr. Johnson on the ground and handcuffed him." J. Pryor Dissenting Op. at 79-80 (footnote call omitted). Speaking for myself, I find the dissent's laundry list somewhat less compelling than the majority's—it seems clear to me, for instance, that a handcuffed suspect can still threaten officer safety, see, e.g., United States v. Sanders, 994 F.2d 200, 209-10 (5th Cir. 1993)—but I certainly can't dismiss the dissent's assessment of the situation as ridiculous or groundless.
So even in this case—and even now, more than three years after the fact, from the cozy comfort of our respective judicial  chambers—we're having a healthy, good-faith debate about whether the "totality of the circumstances" warranted Officer Williams's seizure of the bullet. And although I find that the balance tips in Officer Williams's—and thus the majority's—favor, there are, I must admit, decent arguments on both sides. What I worry about is the next case—and the one after that, and the one after that—which will inevitably involve a different mix of variables. Let's take, for instance, "time of day," which the majority emphasizes—Officer Williams responded to the call here in the wee hours, around 4:00 a.m. Majority Op. at 9-10. What if, instead, he had encountered Johnson in broad daylight in the middle of the afternoon? Same result? How about "location of the scene"? Id. Opa-Locka is apparently a pretty tough neighborhood—a "high-crime area." Id. But what if we head 10 miles due south, straight down FL-953, to Coral Gables? (For our Alabama readers, think Mountain Brook or Vestavia Hills; for the Georgians, Milton or Sandy Springs.) Seizure still permissible? Now consider a few of the factors that the dissent brings to bear. By the time the bullet was seized, there were a total of three armed officers on the scene. See J. Pryor Dissenting Op. at 77-78. But what if an officer confronts a suspect alone? Still a Fourth Amendment violation? The dissent also stresses that Johnson was handcuffed—and thus essentially incapable of retrieving and deploying the stashed ammo. Id. Different result if the suspect isn't yet securely restrained at the time the officer feels the bullet?
You get my point. Even we judges—with the luxury of time for study and reflection—can't say for certain how we would crunch those factors in future cases. Where in the world does that leave responding officers? Policemen and women are tasked with the often-unenviable task of protecting the public safety, and in so doing they must make split-second judgments about how best to secure a scene or situation. I would rather not require them to work their way through a multi-factor Fourth Amendment balancing analysis in order to determine whether the decision to confiscate a bullet—a bullet!—will stand up to after-the-fact judicial second-guessing. I would prefer—and I believe Supreme Court precedent supports—a clear rule authorizing the seizure. The Court "repeatedly has acknowledged," in all manner of cases, "the difficulties created for courts, police, and citizens by an ad hoc, case-by-case definition of Fourth Amendment standards to be applied in differing factual circumstances." Oliver v. United States, 466 U.S. 170, 181, 104 S. Ct. 1735, 80 L. Ed. 2d 214 (1984). Such totality-of-the-circumstances balancing, the Court has stressed, "not only makes it difficult for the policeman to discern the scope of his authority"—the thrust of my critique here—but "also creates a danger that constitutional rights will be arbitrarily and inequitably enforced." Id. at 181-82.1 
 Now I recognize, of course, that in Terry the Supreme Court excused itself from "develop[ing] at length" the Fourth Amendment rules that govern the sorts of searches at issue here, saying that they could instead be worked out in "the concrete factual circumstances of individual cases." 392 U.S. at 29. The Court, though, didn't leave everything in a state of totality-of-the-circumstances limbo. Instead, in the very same paragraph, the Court both clarified an overarching principle—namely, that protective searches must be justified by a concern for "the protection of the police officer and others nearby"—and then identified an illustrative list of items whose seizure would, as a per se matter, be deemed to serve that purpose: "guns, knives, clubs, [and] other hidden instruments for the assault of the police officer." Id. To be clear, no one thinks that when an officer conducting a Terry frisk identifies a "gun" he has to pause to brainstorm whether the particular circumstances in which he finds himself warrant a seizure; he can simply take it. Same for a "knife" or a "club"—take it. The question for me, therefore—since I'm the one advocating a clear rule to guide officer conduct—is whether a bullet fairly fits within Terry's catch-all category, "other hidden instruments for the assault of the police officer." I think it does. An "instrument" is an "object, device, or apparatus designed or used for a particular purpose or task." Oxford English Dictionary (online ed.) Simply as a matter of plain language, it doesn't seem to me too far a stretch to conclude that a bullet qualifies as an "object" that can be "used" to assault a police officer. And that seems to me all the more true given Terry's unmistakable focus on officer safety.
So in the next "bullet case," rather than asking—or worse, requiring the responding officer to ask—whether the neighborhood is sufficiently scary, the hour sufficiently late, the light sufficiently dim, and the suspect and scene sufficiently secure, I would simply hold that the Fourth Amendment permits the protective seizure.
BRANCH