). And the fact that Investigators Tsai and Carlton could have testified to this act confounds any contention that "entering the passcode—was not incriminating." Id. at     (7).
Viewed as a whole, the Government's inquiries constituted "not only ... express questioning, but also ... words or actions ... that the police should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the suspect." Innis, 446 U.S. at 301 (footnote omitted). Without the  benefit of counsel that he had requested, subjecting Appellee to a custodial interrogation endangered his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and violated the protective rule created in Edwards. 451 U.S. at 484-85. In light of this holding, we need not reach the question of whether the Government directly violated Appellee's Fifth Amendment privilege against compelled self-incrimination. We thus do not address whether Appellee's delivery of his passcode was "testimonial" or "compelled," as each represents a distinct inquiry. Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial Dist. Court of Nev., 542 U.S. 177, 189, 124 S. Ct. 2451, 159 L. Ed. 2d 292 (2004).
The dissent contends that the Fifth Amendment only protects testimonial communications, Mitchell,     M.J. at     (4-6) (Ryan, J., dissenting), but we are enforcing the "prophylactic" Miranda right to counsel, and the "second layer of prophylaxis" established in Edwards, both of which are constitutionally grounded measures taken to protect the core Fifth Amendment privilege. McNeil v. Wisconsin, 501 U.S. 171, 176-77, 111 S. Ct. 2204, 115 L. Ed. 2d 158 (1991); accord Dickerson v. United States, 530 U.S. 428, 442-43, 120 S. Ct. 2326, 147 L. Ed. 2d 405 (2000) (upholding Miranda against legislative challenge, but declining to hold that nothing besides Miranda will ever "suffice to satisfy constitutional requirements").
Because Edwards forbids interrogation following the invocation of the Miranda right to counsel, not just interrogation that succeeds, 451 U.S. at 484-85, it follows that those who seek Edwards protection do not need to establish that the interrogation produced or sought a testimonial statement in order to establish a violation. Rather, only interrogation itself must be established, and Appellee has demonstrated that entry of his passcode was an "incriminating response" that the Government should have known they were "reasonably likely to elicit." Innis, 446 U.S. at 301. Once an Edwards violation has been established, whether the incriminating response or derivative evidence will be suppressed is a question of remedy, not wrong. This interpretation of Edwards makes intuitive sense, because badgering an unrepresented suspect into granting access to incriminating information threatens the core Fifth Amendment privilege, even if the government already knows that the suspect knows his own password.
At the moment when interrogation occurred, the violation of Appellee's rights under Edwards was complete. The only question that remains is the proper remedy. Under the plain language of the Military Rules of Evidence, any evidence derived from a violation of Edwards must be suppressed. "If a person suspected of an offense and subjected to custodial interrogation requests counsel, any statement made in the interrogation after such request, or evidence derived from the interrogation after such request, is inadmissible against the accused unless counsel was present for the interrogation." M.R.E. 305(c)(2) (emphasis added).
The Government argues that the suppression of derivative evidence does not extend to violations of the Edwards rule, citing United States v. Patane, 542 U.S. 630, 124 S. Ct. 2620, 159 L. Ed. 2d 667 (2004). In Patane, a three-justice plurality of the Supreme Court held that physical evidence discovered as a result of a suspect's voluntary statements was admissible at trial, despite the failure to administer a Miranda warning. Id. at 634. The Government reasons that if derivative evidence is not suppressed when Miranda's prophylactic protections are violated,6  certainly the same rule applies when the Edwards "second layer of prophylaxis," McNeil, 501 U.S. at 176, is violated. But whatever the merits of the Government's Patane argument, the Military Rules of Evidence expressly provide that "[a]n individual may claim the most favorable privilege provided by the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, Article 31, or these rules." M.R.E. 301(a) (emphasis added). And though the Government argues that the derivative evidence language in M.R.E. 305(c)(2)  is the result of a scrivener's error, those arguments are not persuasive.7 
Furthermore, the Government has not established that the contents of Appellee's phone are admissible because they would have inevitably been discovered. For the exception to apply, the Government must "demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that when the illegality occurred, the government agents possessed, or were actively pursuing, evidence or leads that would have inevitably led to the discovery of the evidence in a lawful manner." United States v. Wicks, 73 M.J. 93, 103 (C.A.A.F. 2014) (internal quotation marks omitted) (citations omitted). The Government's sole argument8  is that it could have legally compelled Appellee to "press his finger to the phone and thereby unlock it" under United States v. Fagan, 28 M.J. 64, 69 (C.M.A. 1989) ("A servicemember simply has no basis to withhold fingerprints from military authorities [on Fourth Amendment grounds], provided that the manner of collecting them is reasonable."); see also Doe v. United States, 487 U.S. 201, 210-11, 108 S. Ct. 2341, 101 L. Ed. 2d 184 (1988) (the compulsion of physical, nontestimonial acts is not prohibited by the Fifth Amendment). But the record discloses no guarantee that this procedure would have succeeded, and the Government therefore cannot demonstrate inevitability.
Although the iPhone "had Touch ID capabilities" and "the accused had two finger/thumbprints saved," we cannot know whether Appellee had in fact turned fingerprint access "on" (as opposed to simply saving his fingerprints), because the phone's entire security system is now permanently turned off. Moreover, the Government did not even learn about the possibility of fingerprint access until April 20, 2016, over fifteen months after the offending interrogation. We conclude that the Government's eventual access to the phone's contents was not inevitable, but rather "a matter of mere speculation and conjecture, in which [the Court] will not engage." United States v. Maxwell, 45 M.J. 406, 422 (C.A.A.F. 1996).
Although the contents of Appellee's phone are therefore inadmissible, Appellee's physical iPhone should not have been suppressed, since it was seized pursuant to lawful authorization prior to the Edwards violation, or any other alleged Fifth Amendment violation. The phone itself does not constitute evidence derived from the illicit interrogation, and the possibility that a court-martial panel could impermissibly review the phone's contents—since it is now permanently unlocked—could be overcome with an instruction forbidding such use. The military judge therefore abused her discretion in suppressing the phone itself.
 III. Judgment
The decision of the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals, to the extent that it affirmed the suppression of the contents of the iPhone, is hereby affirmed. To the extent that it affirmed the suppression of the physical phone, it is reversed. The record is returned to the Judge Advocate General of the Army for transmission to the convening authority for further proceedings.
