), emanate from persons who are not subject to the UCMJ. See Article 2, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 802 (2012).
To the extent that VADM DeRenzi and RADM Crawford discussed either external pressures generally or this case specifically with RADM Lorge, there is no evidence whatsoever that they did so in an attempt to influence RADM Lorge's action in this case. Indeed, the majority concludes directly to the contrary: "VADM DeRenzi . . . (unintentionally) drew RADM Lorge's attention to the difficulties faced by commanders and the increased congressional and presidential scrutiny the services faced in sexual assault cases." United States v. Barry,     M.J.    ,     (7) (C.A.A.F. 2018); "we do not question RADM Crawford's motives or believe he acted intentionally." Id. at     (12).
The majority nonetheless finds actual unlawful influence on the part of RADM Crawford, and not on the part of VADM DeRenzi, though they both imparted essentially the same message to RADM Lorge. The DuBay hearing military judge tarred her with the same brush as RADM Crawford, ultimately concluding that "RADM Lorge was influenced by conversations with senior military leaders; specifically[,] VADM DeRenzi and VADM Crawford when taking action in this case."4  The majority's analysis both ignores the statutory text and is contrary to our case law on actual unlawful influence.
 A.
Article 37(a), UCMJ, provides that:
No person subject to this chapter may attempt to coerce or, by any unauthorized means, influence the action of a court-martial or any other military tribunal or any member thereof, in reaching the findings or sentence in any case, or the action of any convening, approving, or reviewing authority with respect to his judicial acts.
(Emphasis added.)
This Court reviews questions of statutory construction de novo. United States v. Wilson, 76 M.J. 4, 6 (C.A.A.F. 2017). Ordinary rules of statutory construction apply to our analysis of both the UCMJ and the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States (MCM). United States v. Reese, 76 M.J. 297, 301 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (citing United States v. Muwwakkil, 74 M.J. 187, 194 (C.A.A.F. 2015); United States v. Custis, 65 M.J. 366, 370 (C.A.A.F. 2007); United States v. Lewis, 65 M.J. 85, 88 (C.A.A.F. 2007). "The plain language [of a statute] will control," unless such an interpretation would "lead to an absurd result." Lewis, 65 M.J. at 88 (citations omitted). Statutory language should generally be given its commonly understood and approved meaning. Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246, 263, 72 S. Ct. 240, 96 L. Ed. 288 (1952) (Where the statute does not specify the meaning of a word, the "absence of contrary direction may be taken as satisfaction with widely accepted definitions, not as a departure from them."); United States v. Sager, 76 M.J. 158, 161 (C.A.A.F. 2017); United States v. Miller, 67 M.J. 87, 90 (C.A.A.F. 2008).
The text of the statute alone requires that the actor commit the unlawful influence intentionally for a myriad of reasons. First, the word "attempt" denotes an intentional action. Webster's New International Dictionary of  the English Language 177 (2d ed. 1952) (unabridged) [hereinafter Webster's Unabridged] (attempt means "[t]o try; to endeavor to do or perform"). And here, "attempt to" modifies each verb in the list - "coerce or, by any unauthorized means, influence." See Long v. United States, 199 F.2d 717, 719 (4th Cir. 1952) (where there is a string of verbs in a series, a modifier normally applies to the entire series).5  This interpretation of Article 37(a), UCMJ, is in accord with the "series-qualifier canon," which is the "presumption that when there is a straightforward, parallel construction that involves all nouns or verbs in a series, a prepositive or postpositive modifier normally applies to the entire series." Black's Law Dictionary 1574 (10th ed. 2014) (entry for "series-qualifier canon"); see also Antonin Scalia & Bryan A. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts 147 (2012) (discussing this canon and citing, as an example, the Fourth Amendment's phrase "unreasonable searches and seizures," in which the word "unreasonable" qualifies both "searches" and "seizures"). Under this canon, the word "attempt" in Article 37(a), UCMJ, is a prepositive modifier that applies to the words "to coerce" as well as the words "by any unauthorized means, influence."
Relatedly the title of the section, "Unlawfully influencing action of court," Article 37(a), UCMJ, connotes an "illegal" or "[n]ot lawful" action. Webster's Unabridged at 2783; F.T.C. v. Mandel Bros., 359 U.S. 385, 388-89, 79 S. Ct. 818, 3 L. Ed. 2d 893 (1952) (holding that the title of a statutory provision "though not limiting the plain meaning of the text, is nonetheless a useful aid in resolving an ambiguity"). In that context, an "attempt" has consistently been interpreted to require specific intent. See, e.g., Article 80(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 880 (2012) (an "attempt" is "[a]n act, done with specific intent to commit an offense") (emphasis added); Braxton v. United States, 500 U.S. 344, 349, 351, 111 S. Ct. 1854, 114 L. Ed. 2d 385 n.* (1991) (where "the statute does not specify the elements of 'attempt . . . ,' they are those required for an 'attempt' at common law which include a specific intent to commit the unlawful act" (citation omitted)); see also United States v. Willis, 46 M.J. 258, 261 (C.A.A.F. 1997).6 
Moreover, both "coerce" and "influence" themselves suggest intentional action, albeit with different connotations - coerce means to "[t]o constrain or restrain by force, esp. by law or authority," and influence means "[t]o alter or move in respect to character, conduct, or the like," Webster's Unabridged at 519, 1276, or the "[u]se of pressure, authority, or power, usu[ally] indirectly, to induce action or change the decisions or acts of another." Black's Law Dictionary at 898 (10th ed. 2014) (emphasis added) (defining "influence"). It simply is not possible, within the context of Article 37(a), UCMJ, to "unintentionally"  attempt to coerce or influence a convening authority.
The majority's response to this careful analysis of the statute is to coin a newly minted "adverbial clause" exception to the "series-qualifier canon," to avoid the necessity of showing any influence was intentional. But the bald assertion that the insertion of the phrase "by any unauthorized means" interrupts the sequence of the verbs and thus prevents the series-qualifier canon from applying "attempt" to "by unauthorized means,7  influence" is both grammatically and logically incorrect. It is true that the syntax of a statutory provision sometimes will indicate that a word does not modify all of the following items in a series. But "[t]he typical way in which syntax" might "suggest no carryover modification" is that some word "will be repeated before the second element." Scalia & Garner, supra p. 4, at 148. For example, the sequence would be interrupted, and the majority's interpretation would be correct, if Article 37(a), UCMJ, repeated the word "may" such that it said: "No person . . . may attempt to coerce, or may by unauthorized means, influence." But Article 37(a), UCMJ, does not in fact repeat "may" or any other word that would break the sequence.
The majority's interpretation, created for this case alone, also produces an absurd result that Congress could not have intended and underscores how tortured and strained its misinterpretation of the statute is. See K Mart Corp. v. Cartier, Inc., 486 U.S. 281, 324 n.2, 108 S. Ct. 1811, 100 L. Ed. 2d 313 (1988) (Scalia, J., with whom Rehnquist, C.J., Blackmun, J., and O'Conner, J., joined, concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("[I]t is a venerable principle that a law will not be interpreted to produce absurd results."). Under the majority's view, Congress has apparently prohibited persons subject to the UCMJ from "attempting to coerce" the action of a convening authority but has not prohibited them from "attempting, by any unauthorized means, to influence" the action of a convening authority, so long as the convening authority is not, in fact, influenced. We see no conceivable reason why Congress would allow a person to attempt, by unauthorized means, to influence a convening authority, or permit an Article 37, UCMJ, violation to turn on a convening authority's susceptibility to "feeling" influenced. Further, under the majority's view in this case, our recent unanimous decision in Riesbeck, 77 M.J. 154, would be wrong. There we found an Article 37(a), UCMJ, violation based only on an attempt to influence a court-martial by intentionally stacking the panel with women, without any proof that the attempt succeeded in influencing the outcome.8  See also United States v. Stombaugh, 40 M.J. 208, 213 (C.M.A. 1994) (holding that "attempts to discourage [a witness] from testifying, especially by his Division Officer, can fairly be construed as unlawful command influence").
Finally, the majority's interpretation also contradicts the position of both parties in this case. At oral argument counsel for Appellant was asked specifically whether the word "attempt" qualifies both "to coerce" and "by any unauthorized means, influence." Counsel for Appellant answered: "Your honor, I believe it applies to both coerce and influence." Oral Argument at 10:39, United States v. Barry, No. 17-0162 (C.A.A.F. Mar. 22, 2018). Government counsel likewise argued in its brief that there could be no unlawful command influence because there was no "unauthorized attempt to influence a court-martial," Brief for Appellee  at 37, United States v. Barry, No. 17-0162 (C.A.A.F. Jan. 22, 2018), and made similar statements throughout the oral argument.
 B.
The majority's scant attention to the statutory text leaves its analysis dependent upon its conclusions that: (a) RADM Lorge felt influenced by external pressures, including discussions with RADM Crawford, Barry,     M.J. at     (11); and (b) that the minimal discussions with RADM Crawford were "improper." Id. at     (12). But the former passive formulation - "person felt influenced" - is not what the statute requires, and the latter is an assertion, with no citation of authority.9 
In stark contrast, our interpretation of the text is fully consistent with this Court's past jurisprudence, as the majority concedes. Barry,     M.J. at     n.7 (13 n.7) (acknowledging that "our jurisprudence has traditionally recognized unlawful influence only in cases involving intentional interference with the military justice system"). This Court has consistently held that actual unlawful influence requires an intentional manipulation of the military justice system that results in an improper handling or disposition of a case. In other words, where this Court has found actual unlawful influence, we have concluded that the actor exerting the unlawful influence did so with specific intent or motive to "unlawfully coerce or influence" the proceedings. See, e.g., Riesbeck, 77 M.J. at 165 ("Court stacking is 'a form of unlawful command influence,' and has the improper motive of seeking to affect the findings or sentence. . . ."); United States v. Lewis, 63 M.J. 405 (C.A.A.F. 2006) (finding the orchestrated effort of the trial counsel and staff judge advocate to unseat a military judge constitutes actual unlawful command influence); United States v. Simpson, 58 M.J. 368, 374 (C.A.A.F. 2003) (distinguishing between actual and apparent unlawful command influence because actual unlawful command influence requires intent where apparent unlawful command influence does not); United States v. Baldwin, 54 M.J. 308, 310 (C.A.A.F. 2001) ("We have long held that the use of command meetings to purposefully influence the members in determining a court-martial sentence violates, Article 37, UCMJ.") (citations omitted)); United States v. Upshaw, 49 M.J. 111, 113 (C.A.A.F. 1998) (finding that "improper motive" is an element of court stacking, a form of actual unlawful command influence").
Of course, in cases of apparent unlawful influence, a majority of this Court found that intent on the part of the actor is not required. See generally Boyce, 76 M.J. at 251 (explaining that no showing of knowledge or intent is required to demonstrate an appearance of unlawful command influence).
Wholly untethered from the requirements of both statutory and case law for finding actual unlawful influence, the majority, in essence, adopts the Court's ruling on apparent unlawful influence in Boyce to conclude there was actual unlawful influence here.
Such an "improper manipulation of the criminal justice process," Boyce, M.J. at 246, even if effectuated unintentionally, will not be countenanced by this Court. While we do not question RADM Crawford's motives or believe he acted intentionally, the plain language of Article 37(a), UCMJ, does not require intentional action."
Barry,     M.J. at     (12) (emphasis added).
The latter assertion of course, is entirely dependent upon the efficacy of the so-called "adverbial clause exception" to the ordinary rules of statutory interpretation, which fails, and the freshly created "mantle of command involvement" requirement for intent, Barry,     M.J. at     n.7 (13 n.7), for which no authority, beyond the whim of the majority, exists. See, e.g., Lewis, 63 M.J. at 413-14 (finding actual unlawful influence despite the absence of a "mantle of command" relationship).
 Both the statute and our case law, including our recent decision in Riesbeck, require intentional action in cases of actual unlawful influence. Boyce certainly held that:
No showing of knowledge or intent on the part of government actors is required in order for an appellant to successfully demonstrate that an appearance of unlawful command influence arose in a specific case.
76 M.J. at 251 (emphasis added).10  But the Court resolves this case on the ground of actual unlawful influence despite explicitly recognizing that any influence by RADM Crawford or VADM DeRenzi was unintentional, Barry,     M.J. at    ,     (7, 12), and implicitly acknowledging that no one subject to the UCMJ attempted to "coerce or, by any unauthorized means, influence the action of a court-martial." Article 37(a), UCMJ.
Nor do we understand how the majority (quite modestly) condemns RADM Crawford yet entirely excuses VADM DeRenzi, who the DuBay military judge found also influenced RADM Lorge. If the test applied is precedent based on the statutory language of Article 37, UCMJ, neither acted intentionally and there is no actual unlawful influence by either of them. If the test applied is the judicially created one for apparent unlawful influence it turns on effect: even a quick review of the appendices makes clear that RADM Lorge's decision was affected (in small part) by both of them, and that VADM DeRenzi's "discuss[ion of] the realities of the current environment," left a lasting impression on RADM Lorge and, as the DuBay military judge found, affected his action in this case.
In holding that RADM Crawford unlawfully influenced RADM Lorge's action while VADM DeRenzi did not, Barry,     M.J. at     & n.5 (10 & n.5), the majority provides no principled guidance for why RADM Crawford's actions constitute an unintentional, yet "improper manipulation," Boyce, 76 M.J. at 247, but VADM DeRenzi's do not, given that its new formulation for actual unlawful influence is whether the "person felt influenced." In support of this distinction, the majority offers that VADM DeRenzi's conduct occurred earlier in time and that RADM Lorge believed he was receiving legal advice from RADM Crawford. Barry,     M.J. at     n.5 (10 n.5).
But notwithstanding these distinctions, the DuBay military judge found as fact that RADM Lorge "felt influenced" to take the action he did in Appellant's case by the separate conversations with both RADM Crawford and VADM DeRenzi, thus these slightly different facts cannot compel a different result under the majority's new Article 37, UCMJ, "felt influenced" test for actual command influence. Moreover, this bizarre misapplication of its own newly minted test for actual unlawful influence will leave both the field and lower courts floundering to determine how and when unintentional conduct rises to an "unlawful" level or constitutes "improper manipulation."
 II.
The convening authority had the sole discretion to take action on the findings or sentence, Article 60(c), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 860(c) (2012), and had the "unfettered discretion" to modify the findings and sentence of a court-martial. Article 60(c)(2)-(3), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 860(c)(2)-(3)(2012); United States v. Finster, 51 M.J. 185, 186 (C.A.A.F. 1999). "Unfettered" means we may not inquire into, and the convening authority need not state, his reasons for the action. R.C.M. 1107(d)(1); Finster, 51 M.J. at 186.11  While a convening authority need not review  the case for factual sufficiency, R.C.M. 1107(b)(1) (2012), the rule says nothing about what happens when he has done so and found the facts supporting the conviction unconvincing. And we disagree with the Government's argument that though the convening authority in this case believed, and continues to believe, that Appellant's guilt was not proven beyond a reasonable doubt at his court-martial, RADM Lorge retained the discretion to approve a finding of guilty. Appellee's Motion to Clarify Position in Response to Questions at Oral Argument at 8-9, United States v. Barry, No. 17-0162 (C.A.A.F. Apr. 2, 2018). This is particularly so where he has both obliquely suggested in the action itself and then later affirmatively stated, that he believed that Appellant was not guilty. Appendix A at 1, 3-4; Appendix B at 2, 7). To hold otherwise would read justice out of the military justice system, particularly where the convening authority himself is the one who told us he acted in error and did not believe the finding of guilty should be approved. In permitting an action disapproving the finding, we are effectuating, not interfering with, his discretion.
The UCMJ itself says nothing about what to do in this situation, and given the uniqueness of RADM Lorge's action, it is not surprising that this Court has not had to address such a situation in the past. The President is permitted to provide rules for the military justice system, Article 36, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 836, so long as they are not contrary to or inconsistent with the UCMJ. Wilson, 76 M.J. at 6.
R.C.M. 1107(g) (2016 ed.)12  is such a rule, offers a solution, and provides as follows:
(g) Incomplete, ambiguous, or erroneous action. When the action of the convening authority or of a higher authority is incomplete or ambiguous or contains error, the authority who took the incomplete, ambiguous, or erroneous action may be instructed by an authority acting under Articles 64, 66, 67, 67a, or 69 to withdraw the original action and substitute a corrected action.
While this is a case of first impression, as detailed below, RADM Lorge's action was both erroneous and ambiguous. As an authority acting under Article 67(c), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 867(c), and as authorized under R.C.M. 1107(g), this Court therefore may and should instruct the convening authority to withdraw the original action and substitute a corrected action with a finding of not guilty. Article 60(c)(1), UCMJ. The majority is hesitant to recognize this Court's ability to order a corrected action reflecting the intent of the original convening authority where there is a successor convening authority, citing the "sole discretion" afforded a convening authority under R.C.M. 1107(b)(1). See Barry,     M.J. at     & n.10 (15 & n.10). Of course, R.C.M. 1107(g) is an exception to the ordinary "sole discretion" rule and provides this Court the power to instruct a convening authority to replace an erroneous or ambiguous action with a corrected one. And, as has always been the case, where an erroneous or ambiguous action is returned to a successor convening authority, our case law recognizes that the original convening authority's intent ought to guide the manner in which the action is corrected. See United States v. Mendoza, 67 M.J. 53, 54 (C.A.A.F. 2008) (citing United States v. Lower, 10 M.J. 263, 265 (C.M.A. 1981)).
The majority nonetheless asserts that this Court cannot specify "to a new convening authority the content of a corrected action" when the Court acts under R.C.M. 1107(g). Barry,     M.J. at     n.10 (15 n.10). They are, quite simply, wrong. The plain language of R.C.M. 1107(g) authorizes this Court to instruct the convening authority to "substitute a corrected action."13  And we held in Lower, 10 M.J.  263, that the corrected action must reflect the original convening authority's intent and, indeed, that there must be evidence that the new convening authority communicated with the original convening authority to ascertain that intent. Id. at 265; see also United States v. Mendoza, 67 M.J. 53, 54 (C.A.A.F. 2008) (confirming this understanding of Lower).14  Therefore, it is wholly appropriate for this Court to order the successor convening authority to act in a manner consistent with RADM Lorge's intent when correcting his erroneous and ambiguous action.
Because this Court applies principles of statutory construction to the MCM, United States v. Custis, 65 M.J. 366, 370 (C.A.A.F. 2007), we give words their ordinary meaning. See supra at p. 4. Erroneous is defined as "[c]ontaining error; not conformed to truth or justice; incorrect," where error is defined as "a deviation from, or failure to achieve, the right course or standard." Webster's Unabridged at 869; see also R.C.M. 1107(g). Certainly, RADM Lorge's action affirming a finding of guilty when he did not believe Appellant's guilt was proved beyond a reasonable doubt, and that he might even be innocent, does "not conform to truth or justice." Webster's Unabridged at 869 (2d ed. 1952). RADM Lorge swore to his beliefs in two affidavits: "Upon review of the record, I had serious misgivings about the evidence supporting this conviction. Specifically, I did not believe the evidence supported the alleged victim's account of events. I was inclined to disapprove the findings." Appendix A at 1.; "I was convinced then, and am convinced now, that I should have disapproved the findings." Appendix A at 2; "Upon my review of the record of trial from this case, I did not find that the Government proved the allegation against Senior Chief Barry beyond a reasonable doubt." Appendix A at 3; "I believed then, and I believe now, that I should have disapproved the findings." Appendix B at 5; "I would ask you to forgive my failure in leadership and right the wrong that I committed in this case against Senior Chief Barry; ensure justice prevails and when doubt exists, allow a man to remain innocent." Appendix A at 4. In light of these statements, the DuBay hearing military judge found that he took an action he did not want to take in Appellant's case. And RADM Lorge himself recognizes that his action was a violation of his duty. See Appendix A at 4. The action in this case was therefore erroneous by any measure.
Ambiguous is defined as "[d]oubtful or uncertain." Webster's Unabridged at 81; compare United States v. Captain, 75 M.J. 99, 105-06 (C.A.A.F. 2016) (holding that the conflicting language between the approval paragraph and execution resulted in an ambiguous convening authority action that required the convening authority to withdraw the original action and substitute a corrected action), with United States v. Wilson, 65 M.J. 140, 141 (C.A.A.F. 2007) ("[W]hen the plain language of the convening authority's action is facially complete and unambiguous, its meaning must be given effect."). RADM Lorge's action was ambiguous because the statements that accompany it cast "doubt" and render "uncertain" his approval of a finding of guilty in Appellant's case. Webster's Unabridged at 81.
RADM Lorge's action states:
 In my seven years as a General Court-Martial Convening Authority, I have never reviewed a case that has given me greater pause than the one that is before me now. The evidence presented at trial and the clemency submitted on behalf of the accused was compelling and caused me concern as to whether SOCS Barry received a fair trial or an appropriate sentence . . . .
Additionally, having personally reviewed the record of trial, I am concerned that the judicial temperament of the Military Judge potentially calls into question the legality, fairness, and impartially [sic] of this court-martial. The validity of the military justice system depends on the impartiality of military judges both in fact and in appearance. If prejudicial legal error was committed, I strongly encourage the Appellate Court to consider remanding this case for further proceedings or, in the alternative, disapproving the punitive discharge.
The discordance between the action taken and both the sentiments included in the above excerpt and RADM Lorge's post-trial affidavits is palpable. Cf. Captain, 75 M.J. at 105-06; United States v. Loft, 10 M.J. 266, 268 (C.M.A. 1981) (where this Court's predecessor used surrounding documentation to interpret an otherwise unclear convening authority action). Given the above, the question remains how and why the United States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals concluded that the finding and sentence "should be approved" without further inquiry. United States v. Politte, 63 M.J. 24, 25 (C.A.A.F. 2006) (finding that the lower court erred in failing to return a convening authority's action for clarification where there was ambiguity).
Through the sentiments contained in his convening authority action and in his later affidavits, RADM Lorge both acted erroneously in approving the finding and sentence and introduced obvious ambiguity into his decision. Consequently, this Court should instruct the convening authority to withdraw the action and substitute a corrected action disapproving the finding of guilty pursuant to R.C.M. 1107(g).15  Only in this way can RADM Lorge's action be corrected to comport with his actual preferred action. Cf. Gosser, 64 M.J. at 96 ("When addressing situations that present an ambiguity, [this Court has] concluded the proper course of action is to remand for corrective action under R.C.M. 1107(g)."); cf. United States v. Cox, 22 C.M.A. 69, 72, 46 C.M.R. 69, 72 (1972) ("the convening authority is bound by the mandate of the appellate court"); United States v. Stevens, 10 C.M.A. 417, 418, 27 C.M.R. 491, 492 (1959) (the action of a convening authority contrary to the order of this Court "[is] void and of no effect").
 III.
There is no question that external pressures known to RADM Lorge and discussed with VADM DeRenzi and RADM Crawford influenced RADM Lorge. His affidavits are replete with references to his concerns about taking the action he wanted to in the face of congressional oversight, political pressures, and specific senators, and he frankly admits that these forces influenced him. Nor, however outré his response, were his concerns unfounded: we are all too well familiar with the consequences of these myriad forces on both the military justice system, see, e.g., Riesbeck, 77 M.J. at 164; Boyce, 76 M.J. at 245, and on individual convening authorities. See, e.g., supra note 3. Rather than contort our Article 37, UCMJ, jurisprudence and blithely ignore both the discordance of RADM Lorge's action with his clearly expressed beliefs and the political forces and actors who are primarily responsible for influencing him, we should act pursuant to our authority under R.C.M. 1107(g); Article 67(e), UCMJ; see United States v. Emminizer, 56 M.J. 441 (C.A.A.F. 2002); see also Politte, 63  M.J. at 24, and require the corrective action to which Appellant is entitled.

 

