.
In United States v. Guardado, 77 M.J. 90 (C.A.A.F. 2017), and United States v. Reese, 76 M.J. 297 (C.A.A.F. 2017), we examined the application of a long-standing limitation, prescribed by the President in Manual for Courts-Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 60.c.(6)(c) (2012 ed.) (MCM),1  on the government's ability to charge novel specifications under Article 134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934. The majority misunderstands that limitation, and reads Guardado and by extension Reese, on which Guardado relies, far too broadly and, indeed, misapplies them. United States v. Gleason,     M.J.     (6) (C.A.A.F. 2019).
The President has placed two discrete limitations on the government's ability to draft specifications under Article 134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934.2  The first, referred to as the preemption doctrine, "prohibits application of Article 134 to conduct covered by Articles 80 through 132." MCM pt. IV, para. 60.c.(5)(a). The second constraint, at issue here, limits the government's charging decisions by preventing the drafting of a novel specification where the President has already listed3  an offense under Article 134, UCMJ, containing the core of the elements contemplated by the novel specification. The MCM instructs that: "[i]f conduct by an accused does not fall under any of the listed offenses for violations of Article 134, UCMJ, in this Manual (paragraphs 61 through 113 of this Part) a specification not listed in this Manual may be used to allege the offense." MCM pt. IV, para. 60.c.(6)(c).
Importantly, paragraphs 60.c.(5)(a) and 60.c.(6)(c) in pt. IV of the MCM are the only limitations placed by the President on the government's ability to charge offenses under Article 134, UCMJ. The clear purpose of both limitations is to prevent the government from taking Article 134, UCMJ, as far as the statutory language might permit. See Parker, 417 U.S. at 753-56. They do so by precluding the government from taking an existing UCMJ offense or a presidentially listed Article 134, UCMJ, offense, removing an important element—such as the requisite intent—and charging the remaining elements as a "novel" Article 134, UCMJ, offense. See Guardado, 77 M.J. at 95; Reese 76 M.J. at 302. Just as prosecutorial interpretation of a criminal statute gives way to Congress' determination that an offense, such as larceny, Article 121, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 921, contains certain elements, see generally Jones, 68 M.J. at 471; United States v. Kick, 7 M.J. 82, 85 (C.M.A. 1979), so too must it give way to the President's determination that an offense, such as obstruction of justice, MCM pt. IV, para. 96.b., contains certain elements. See United States v. Forrester, 76 M.J. 389, 396 (C.A.A.F. 2017); see also United States v. Wilson, 76 M.J. 4, 7-8 (C.A.A.F. 2017); United States v. Miller, 67 M.J. 87, 88-91 (C.A.A.F. 2008); United States v. Guess, 48 M.J. 69, 71-72 (C.A.A.F. 1998); Miller, 47 M.J. at 356-57.
Reese and Guardado implicated obvious examples of the government taking an offense listed by the President under Article 134, UCMJ, and drafting a novel specification that failed to allege one of the elements of that offense.4  It is that charging strategy  that is prohibited by MCM pt. IV, para. 60.c.(6)(c), and precisely the conduct that this Court focused on and disallowed in Guardado and Reese.
In contrast, the Government's charging decision in this case was entirely consonant with the plain language of MCM pt. IV, para. 60.c.(6)(c). As Judge Maggs ably explains, Gleason,     M.J. at     (1-4) (Maggs, J., dissenting), the novel specification here is not contained within the elements of the listed Article 134, UCMJ, of obstruction of justice—"knowingly and wrongfully interfer[ing] with [the] ability to place an emergency phone call"—and thus does not fall under a listed Article 134, UCMJ, offense. See generally MCM pt. IV, para. 61-113.
Moreover, the Government's burden of proof was not lessened by removing an element as was the case in Guardado and Reese; the Government's burden changed to include the elements of the novel offense, elements that the Government would not have had to prove if it had charged Appellant with obstruction of justice. Gleason,     M.J. at     (3-4) (Maggs, J., dissenting). In essence, what happened here is in contradistinction with the facts of Guardado, where, "[i]n deleting a vital element, the Government, in effect improperly reduced its burden of proof." 77 M.J. at 96.
I further agree with Judge Maggs that the Court's reasoning is flawed because it looks to the "'circumstances' proved at trial to determine the 'nature of the acts' of which Appellant was charged," and thus "improperly relies on the evidence presented at trial in determining the nature of the acts alleged in the novel specification." Gleason,     M.J. at     (2) (Maggs, J., dissenting). Whether a novel specification fails to state an offense because it falls under a listed offense, is determined by comparing the language of the specification to the elements the President delineated for the listed offense. See United States v. Sutton, 68 M.J. 455, 457 (C.A.A.F. 2010) ("[T]he standard for determining whether a specification states an offense is whether the specification alleges 'every element' of the offense either expressly or by implication." (quoting United States v. Crafter, 64 M.J. 209, 211 (C.A.A.F. 2006))); United States v. Mayo, 12 M.J. 286, 288 (C.M.A. 1982) ("A specification fatally flawed because it does not contain an allegation of fact essential to proof of the offense charged is not restored to legal life by the Government's production at trial of evidence of the fact."), overruled on other grounds by United States v. Fosler, 70 M.J. 225, 232 (C.A.A.F. 2011). This can (and most often should) be decided prior to trial. Consistent with this principle, the Court in Reese and Guardado looked only at what was alleged in the respective novel specifications and did not consider the evidence presented at trial. Reese, 76 M.J. at 302-03; Guardado, 77 M.J. at 95-96.
The majority here focuses not on elements, but instead breezily concludes that: "Guardado anticipates a relatively broad approach in analyzing conduct alleged in novel specifications. Thus, we need not confine ourselves to an element-by-element comparison between the drafted offense and the offense listed in the MCM." Gleason,     M.J. at     (5). I disagree. Instead, I agree with Judge Maggs that when analyzing whether a novel specification comports with MCM pt. IV, para. 60.c.(6)(c), it is the elements set forth in the novel charge that control, not the "conduct" apart from the elements, and not on evidence adduced at trial. See Sutton, 68 M.J. at 457; Mayo, 12 M.J. at 288. I part ways with Judge Maggs' opinion only because I disagree that Reese and Guardado, "recognized a new limitation on charging offenses under Article 134, UCMJ." Gleason,     M.J. at     (1) (Maggs, J., dissenting). Rather, it is today's majority's understanding of that limitation that is novel. I respectfully dissent.
Judge MAGGS, dissenting.
In United States v. Reese, 76 M.J. 297 (C.A.A.F. 2017), and United States v. Guardado, 77 M.J. 90 (C.A.A.F. 2017), this Court recognized a new limitation on charging offenses under Article 134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2012). The new limitation is that the government cannot use a novel specification to allege an offense if the conduct alleged in  the novel specification is within the "framework" of an Article 134, UCMJ, offense that the President has already enumerated and defined in pt. IV of the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States (2012 ed.) (MCM). Reese, 76 M.J. at 302-03; Guardado, 77 M.J. at 95-96. The Court today holds that the specification at issue in this case violates this newly recognized limitation and therefore fails to state an offense. I disagree.1 
 I.
The novel specification at issue in this case accused Appellant of violating Article 134, UCMJ, when he:
knowingly and wrongfully interfere[d] with Private First Class J.W.'s ability to place an emergency phone call by taking her telephone from her when she went to call the police and that such conduct was to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the armed forces and of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces.
The Court today concludes that this specification fails to state an offense because the misconduct alleged falls within the framework of the enumerated offense of obstruction of justice in MCM pt. IV, para. 96.b., but the specification does not require the Government to prove all of the elements of obstruction of justice.
The first step of the Court's reasoning is to look at the "circumstances" proved at trial to determine the "nature of the acts" of which Appellant was charged. United States v. Gleason,     M.J.     (5-6) (C.A.A.F. 2019). The Court concludes in this case that "[t]he nature of the acts leading to Appellant taking SPC JW's telephone suggests Appellant was by intimidation and by force or the threat of force delaying or preventing communication of information to police relating to an assault." Id. at     (5). To the Court, this sounds like a possible case of obstruction of justice.
A problem with this reasoning is that the Court improperly relies on the evidence presented at trial in determining the nature of the acts alleged in the novel specification. Whether a specification states an offense depends on the language of the specification, not on what facts are proved at trial. See United States v. Crafter, 64 M.J. 209, 211 (C.A.A.F. 2006). Consistent with this principle, the Court in Reese and Guardado looked only at what was alleged in the respective novel specifications and did not consider the evidence presented at trial. Reese, 76 M.J. at 302-03; Guardado, 77 M.J. at 95-96. In my view, if the Court had limited itself to considering the words of the novel specification in this case, it would have reached a different conclusion.
The novel specification required the Government to prove that Appellant "knowingly and wrongfully interfere[d] with Private First Class J.W.'s ability to place an emergency phone call by taking her telephone from her when she went to call the police." These words by themselves do not suggest an offense having the nature of obstruction of justice. While the words of the specification do embrace the circumstances actually proved at trial, they also would cover circumstances having no connection to a criminal proceeding or the administration of justice.  For example, the same specification could have been used if Appellant had prevented SPC JW from placing an emergency call to the police to report a missing child or a traffic hazard requiring urgent police attention. Thus, I do not agree that the nature of the acts alleged in the specification bring the specification within the framework offense of obstruction of justice.
The second step of the Court's reasoning is to examine the elements of the enumerated offense of obstruction of justice as they are listed in MCM pt. IV, paras. 96.b.(2) and (3). The Court concludes that, by using a novel specification, the Government reduced its burden of proof because it "relieved itself of having to prove the second and third elements of obstructing justice." Gleason,     M.J. at     (5). Specifically, the Court indicates that the Government did not have to prove that there were "criminal proceedings pending," MCM pt. IV, para. 96.b.(2), or that the accused acted with an "intent to influence, impede, or otherwise obstruct the due administration of justice," id. pt. IV, para. 96.b.(3). The Court therefore concludes that the new limitation recognized in Reese and Guardado applies in this case and that the novel specification fails to state an offense.
A problem with this second step of the Court's reasoning is that the Court focuses only on what the Government did not have to prove under the novel specification and not on what the Government did have to prove. In fact, the wording of the novel specification required the Government to prove three elements that the Government would not have had to prove if the Government had charged Appellant with obstruction of justice. These elements are: (1) a person was attempting to make an emergency phone call; (2) the accused interfered with this attempt; and (3) the accused's interference was knowing and wrongful. Thus, even though the Government did not have to prove everything that the offense of obstruction of justice would require, the Government took on a different burden. Accordingly, the novel offense did not fall within the framework of the offense of obstruction of justice.
II.
In Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 733, 94 S. Ct. 2547, 41 L. Ed. 2d 439 (1974), the United States Supreme Court considered, among other issues, a vagueness challenge to a novel specification under Article 134, UCMJ. The specification at issue alleged that the accused, an Army officer, had uttered words to enlisted soldiers criticizing the Vietnam war and telling them that African American soldiers "should refuse to go to Viet Nam and if sent should refuse to fight." Id. at 738 n.5. The Supreme Court concluded that the specification was not void for vagueness because the accused "could have had no reasonable doubt" that his conduct was "'to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the armed forces.'" Id. at 757 (quoting Article 134, UCMJ). The same conclusion is true here. Although the President has not yet defined the offense of interfering with an emergency call in pt. IV of the MCM, preventing someone from making an emergency call to the police is so inherently wrongful that Appellant could have foreseen a charge under Article 134, UCMJ. Indeed, as the Government points out, some states by statute have specifically established the crime of interfering with an emergency call. See, e.g., Tenn. Code Ann. § 65-21-117 (effective July 1, 2012). Thus while I agree with the Court's expressed caution about the "potentially over-expansive use" of novel specifications under Article 134, UCMJ, see Gleason,     M.J. at     (6), I do not see any overreach here. For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.

 

