) (finding no probable cause in part because affidavit contained no evidence accused actually owned a computer or had Internet access in his room). Appellant could have checked his personal e-mail at work, or at other locations where deployed servicemembers access the Internet. Likewise, the fact that his government-issued computer was a laptop did not make it any more likely that he was storing child pornography in his quarters, as opposed to somewhere else. Cf. United States v. Rowland, 145 F.3d 1194, 1205 (10th Cir. 1998) (finding no probable cause to search suspect's home because contraband videotapes were delivered to a post office box and "[his] home . . . was but one of an otherwise unlimited possible sites for viewing or storage . . . . [and t]he . . . affidavit provided no basis to either limit the possible sites or suggest that [the suspect]'s home was more likely than the otherwise endless possibilities"). The portability of both laptops and the digital movies and images the Government sought here makes any "commonsense" link to Appellant's room exceedingly tenuous.
I dissented in Macomber because I did not believe the evidence there provided a legitimate nexus to the appellant's dormitory room. 67 M.J. at 221-23 (Ryan, J., dissenting). But the magistrate in that case at least had in front of him a generic "pedophile profile," which indicated that persons with a sexual interest in children often store child pornography in their homes (and especially in their bedrooms). Here, the magistrate was not presented with even this constitutionally minimally relevant evidence. 3  
Further, the magistrate in Macomber at least knew that the suspect had used his dormitory as the return address when ordering child pornography through the mail. 67 M.J. at 219. In this case, the only residence tied to child pornography was Appellant's residence in Georgia, the address associated with the charlesjclayton@yahoo.com account.
The facts here do not approach even the low bar this Court set in Gallo. In that case, child pornography had been found on the appellant's work computer and there was evidence that those files had been accessed from or copied to a floppy disk, leading the Court to reason that the floppy disk would likely be found at the suspect's home. 55 M.J. at 421-22; id. at 423 (Sullivan, J., concurring). In this case there was no evidence that Appellant had transferred pornography to media that he might have taken to his quarters, and no computer under Appellant's control had yet been found to contain child pornography.
The Court today appears to champion the idea that there is something de minimis about the Fourth Amendment's requirements when the thing sought by a search authorization or warrant is child pornography. It is now effectively the case that signing up for a website related to that topic -- expressing an interest in it, from any location at all -- provides sufficient cause to search one's home or living quarters.     M.J. at     (12-13). This reasoning requires three logical inferences: First, if the suspect is a member of an Internet group related to child pornography, he has access to a computer. Second, if he has access to a computer, it is in his home or living quarters. Third, membership in the group equates to downloading and possessing child pornography. The first inference makes sense, but the other two do not -- at least on the evidence presented to this magistrate.
People access the Internet at work, Internet cafes, public libraries, and myriad other places. The majority's logic is not and cannot be limited to one's home. Once we have held that an expressed interest in child pornography probably means you are viewing and secreting it somewhere, it seems equally sustainable to hold that the government is free to search for that pornography anywhere. This comes dangerously close to reviving the writs of assistance that were the impetus for enacting the Fourth Amendment in the first place. See generally Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616, 625-26, 6 S. Ct. 524, 29 L. Ed. 746 (1886) (discussing the history of unreasonable searches and seizures prior to independence and how they influenced the Framers' view of the Fourth Amendment).
It is true that we are not the first court to treat child pornography this way. Clayton,     M.J. at     (11) (citing United States v. Gourde, 440 F.3d 1065 (9th Cir. 2006); United States v. Martin, 426 F.3d 68 (2d Cir. 2005); United States v. Froman, 355 F.3d 882 (5th Cir. 2004); United States v. Hutto, 84 F. App'x 6 (10th Cir. 2003)). But that others have joined our adventures does not make the course any less a folly. The better route is to continue to require, consistent with both M.R.E. 315(f)(2) and Gates, 462 U.S. at 238, some nexus between the items sought and the place the government wants to search. Accord Higgins, 557 F.3d at 390; Frazier, 423 F.3d at 533.
II. The Good Faith Exception
Because I do not believe the magistrate had a substantial basis for finding probable cause here, I must address the exception to the exclusionary rule for good faith reliance  on a warrant, first announced by the Supreme Court in United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 922, 104 S. Ct. 3405, 82 L. Ed. 2d 677 (1984), and codified for the military justice system in M.R.E. 311(b)(3). Under this rule:
Evidence that was obtained as a result of an unlawful search or seizure may be used if:
(A) The search or seizure resulted from an authorization to search, seize or apprehend issued by an individual competent to issue the authorization under Mil. R. Evid. 315(d) or from a search warrant or arrest warrant issued by competent civilian authority;
(B) The individual issuing the authorization or warrant had a substantial basis for determining the existence of probable cause; and
(C) The officials seeking and executing the authorization or warrant reasonably and with good faith relied on the issuance of the authorization or warrant. Good faith shall be determined on an objective standard.
I do not believe this exception saves the search here because reliance on a warrant is not in good faith "[w]here the magistrate was misled by information in an affidavit that the affiant knew was false or would have known was false except for his reckless disregard of the truth." United States v. Carter, 54 M.J. 414, 420 (C.A.A.F. 2001) (citation and quotation marks omitted). If government agents falsely or recklessly inform a magistrate, courts cannot allow those same agents to paper over their untruths with an exception meant to protect generally blameless actors.
At least one other court has held that:
[T]he necessity of a nexus between the suspected criminal activity and the particular place to be searched is so well established that in the absence of such a connection, "the affidavit and resulting warrant are so lacking in indicia of probable cause as to render official belief in its existence entirely unreasonable."
Poolaw v. Marcantel, 565 F.3d 721, 734 (10th Cir. 2009) (quoting United States v. Gonzales, 399 F.3d 1225, 1231 (10th Cir. 2005)). This is an argument that we have not yet addressed, but it is apparent even under our already-existing case law that the good faith exception does not save the search authorization here.
The affiant in this case knew that no pornography had been discovered on any Army computer, let alone Appellant's computer. Despite this fact, she included in her affidavit a statement unambiguously linking Appellant to already-discovered pornography: "The Camp Arifjan CID Office is currently conducting the discovery of apparent child pornography located within one of the Coalition Forces Land Component Command (CFLCC), CAKU, computers and the suspected login user is LTC Charles J. CLAYTON." Any reasonable law enforcement agent would know that a linkage between a suspect and contraband would be extremely important to a magistrate's decision to issue a search authorization. To indicate such a linkage without explaining to the magistrate precisely what she claims to have meant -- that the Criminal Investigation Command (CID) suspected "a person" within CFLCC -- shows a reckless disregard for the truth of the information before the magistrate, 4  and CID therefore could not rely on the search authorization in good faith. Cf. Wilson v. Russo, 212 F.3d 781, 788 (3d Cir. 2000) ("[O]missions are made with reckless disregard if an officer withholds a fact in his ken that 'any reasonable person would have known . . . was the kind of thing the judge would wish to know.'" (quoting United States v. Jacobs, 986 F.2d 1231, 1235 (8th Cir. 1993))); United States v. Cowgill, ___ M.J. ___, 2008 CCA LEXIS 494 (12-13) (C.A.A.F. 2010) (plurality opinion) (determining affiant acted with reckless disregard for the truth where, when asked a question by the magistrate that affiant did not know answer to, affiant gave magistrate what he assumed to be correct answer (it was incorrect) without either telling magistrate he was not sure or checking to make sure that the answer was, in fact, correct).
III. Conclusion
I would reverse the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals. I respectfully dissent.

 

