
I concur with Senior Judge Effron's dissent. I write separately to point out the additional, constitutional infirmity with the Charge and specifications in this case raised by the vast disparity between the maximum sentences authorized for actual and virtual child pornography offenses at the time of Appellant's court-martial.
I am well familiar with the holdings in both United States v. Leonard, 64 M.J. 381, 384 (C.A.A.F. 2007), and United States v. Beaty, 70 M.J. 39, 41 (C.A.A.F. 2011). Leonard still accurately stands for the general proposition that where a specification adequately alleges the same conduct and mens rea as a directly analogous federal statute, except for the jurisdictional element, the offense may be punished as authorized by the United States Code. 64 M.J. at 384; Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1003(c)(1)(B)(ii). The opinion also concluded that a particular specification merely alleging "minors" was adequate to use the maximum punishment from the United States Code, which was fifteen years at the relevant time. Leonard, 64 M.J. at 382, 384.
Leonard came after the Court's decision in United States v. Mason, which clarified that virtual child pornography, in addition to actual child pornography, could be prosecuted under Article 134, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2000). 60 M.J. 15, 19-20 (C.A.A.F. 2004). However, Leonard predated Beaty's conclusion that a child pornography offense that did not depict actual children could not be punished by reference to the United States Code, since there was no analogous federal crime. 70 M.J. at 44 ("An offense comprised of acts that cannot be criminally charged under the United States Code at all is neither 'directly analogous' nor 'essentially the same' as one that can be."). In such cases, the maximum authorized punishment is four months of confinement and forfeiture of two-thirds pay per month for four months. Id. at 45; see also Manual for Courts-Martial, United States Maximum Punishment Chart app. 12 at A12-6 (2012 ed.) (MCM); see generally R.C.M. 1003(c). The sentence disparity between the two offenses was not evident until it was raised and decided in Beaty.1 
If the offenses in this case had been charged under clause 3 of Article 134, UCMJ, and referenced 18 U.S.C. § 2252A (2006), there would not be a problem with the specifications in this case. Under that statute "minor" has only one meaning; "minor" is defined as "any person under the age of eighteen years," 18 U.S.C. § 2256(1) (2006) (emphasis added), and it is clear that the "person" must be a real person under the United States Code.2 
But the Government charged the offense as a violation of clauses 1 and 2, Article 134, UCMJ, which permitted, even prior to the recent MCM amendments, prosecution of real, virtual, or what appears to be child pornography. See Beaty, 70 M.J. at 41; see also Finch,     M.J. at     (4-5) (Effron, S.J., with whom Ryan, J., joined, dissenting) (discussing the recent MCM amendments). If, of course, the depictions were of actual minors, there are directly analogous federal statutes, which authorize sentences well in excess of four months3  for the distribution and receipt4   specifications. See, e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 2252A(b)(1); see also Leonard, 64 M.J. at 384. But if the depictions were of virtual child pornography, or what appeared to be minors, the sentencing exposure for each specification was only four months. Beaty, 70 M.J. at 44-45.
This distinction raises the constitutional problem presented by the specifications and adjudged sentence but avoided by the majority. "[A]ny facts that increase the prescribed range of penalties to which a criminal defendant is exposed are elements of the crime." Alleyne v. United States, 133 S. Ct. 2151, 2160, 186 L. Ed. 2d 314 (2013) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Consequently, given the widely disparate sentences occasioned by the status of the depictions, when charged as a violation of clause 1 or 2, Article 134, UCMJ, the fact that the depictions were of actual minors "necessarily forms a constituent part of a new offense and must be submitted to the jury." Alleyne, 133 S. Ct. at 2162.
Even in the guilty plea context, where an accused waives his right to trial by members, United States v. Hansen, 59 M.J. 410, 411 (C.A.A.F. 2004), such elements must be included in the specification and shown to be understood by the accused as elements of the offense to which he is pleading guilty. United States v. Care, 18 C.M.A. 535, 541, 40 C.M.R. 247, 253 (1969); see generally United States v. Ballan, 71 M.J. 28 (C.A.A.F. 2012).
One simply cannot rely on Leonard without considering the import of Beaty for this particular set of offenses. The issue here is not answered solely by reference to the language of the specification without consideration of the effects of our child pornography jurisprudence, particularly in light of the elements as defined during the providence inquiry. Leonard neither addresses nor purports to approach the legal landscape presented in this case, which is the result of permitting offenses under Article 134, UCMJ, that are not offenses under the United States Code, and of resort to "general guidance in the Manual for Courts-Martial in order to ascertain the maximum punishments available under military law for different forms of child pornography offenses." Finch,     M.J. at     (3-5) (Effron, S.J., with whom Ryan, J., joined, dissenting); see also R.C.M. 1003(c)(1)(B).
No one questions that the "actual" status of the minors in the visual depictions at issue significantly increases the range of penalties to which Appellant was exposed, because such acts may be prosecuted under the United States Code, over the penalties allowed if the depictions were of "virtual" child pornography or what appeared to be minors, which generally may not be prosecuted under the United States Code. See Finch,     M.J. at     (8). Given these circumstances, we are simply not free to either disagree with or ignore the Supreme Court's directive as to how such facts must be treated. See, e.g., Alleyne, 133 S. Ct. at 2160, 2162.
Consequently, absent an allegation that the depictions were of "actual" minors, under the law at the time of his conduct Appellant could not be subject to the sentencing maximum for that offense. Id. Moreover, the military judge not only failed to render the error harmless by both explaining that the status of the minors was relevant to the offense and eliciting the Appellant's admission that the pornography was of actual minors, see Ballan, 71 M.J. at 35, he compounded the problem by telling Appellant that they did not have to be actual minors.5 
I respectfully dissent.
 EFFRON, Senior Judge, with whom RYAN, Judge, joins(dissenting):
The military judge in the present case erroneously informed Appellant that it made no difference whether the child pornography images at issue depicted actual or virtual children. In providing this erroneous information to Appellant, the military judge overlooked a critical difference in the penalty landscape at the time of Appellant's trial. At that time, the two offenses at issue carried a combined authorized punishment of thirty years of confinement for the distribution and possession of images involving actual children. United States v. Finch,     M.J.    ,     (4 n.4) (C.A.A.F. 2014). By contrast, if the depictions consisted of virtual images, the combined authorized punishment at the time of Appellant's trial was only eight months of confinement. Id. at     (8-9). The majority concludes that the erroneous statement by the military judge -- equating actual and virtual images -- constituted an insubstantial error under the circumstances of this case. For the reasons set forth below, I respectfully dissent.
 The evolving treatment of actual and virtual images under military law
The federal criminal code treats child pornography offenses as serious crimes, punishable by lengthy periods of confinement. See 18 U.S.C. § 2252A (2012). Although the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) does not contain an article that expressly addresses child pornography, such offenses are prosecuted in courts-martial under Article 134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2012), which prohibits conduct that is prejudicial to good order and discipline, conduct that is service discrediting, and conduct that violates federal criminal statutes.
In United States v. James, 55 M.J. 297 (C.A.A.F. 2001), we upheld a court-martial conviction under a federal child pornography statute that prohibited the possession of child pornography regardless of whether the pornography depicted actual children or computer-generated images of "virtual" children. Our decision was consistent with the views expressed by a majority of other federal courts of appeals that had considered the issue at that time. See id. at 299-300. Subsequently, however, the Supreme Court held that the restrictions on pornographic materials involving actual children could not be applied to computer-generated simulations or images under the First Amendment. Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coal., 535 U.S. 234, 249-56, 122 S. Ct. 1389, 152 L. Ed. 2d 403 (2002).
In United States v. O'Connor, 58 M.J. 450, 454-55 (C.A.A.F. 2003), we recognized that the Supreme Court's decision established binding precedent with respect to application of the federal criminal statute, but we left open the possibility that child pornography offenses involving virtual images could be prosecuted under other provisions of military law. In United States v. Mason, 60 M.J. 15, 20 (C.A.A.F. 2004), we held that under military law, the receipt or possession of virtual child pornography, as well as actual child pornography, could constitute conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline or service discrediting conduct under the first and second clauses of Article 134, UCMJ, depending on the facts of the case.
 The evolving contours of the penalty landscape
During the eight-year period that followed our 2004 decision in Mason, including the period of time covered by the trial in the present appeal, the President did not exercise the authority provided by Article 56, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 856 (2012), to establish maximum punishments for specific forms of child pornography offenses. In the absence of express attention under Article 56, UCMJ, military judges and the appellate courts were required to apply general guidance in the Manual for Courts-Martial in order to ascertain the maximum punishments available under military law for different forms of child pornography offenses. See Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1003(c)(1)(B); United States v. Leonard, 64 M.J. 381, 383-84 (C.A.A.F. 2007) (concluding that R.C.M. 1003(c)(1)(B)(ii) authorized confinement for up to fifteen years in a case involving receipt of actual child pornography); Finch,     M.J. at     (4 n.4) (noting the current authority for confinement of up to twenty years for distribution of actual images and confinement of up to ten years for receipt of actual images); United States v. Beaty, 70 M.J. 39, 44-45 (C.A.A.F. 2011) (concluding that the rule authorized a maximum punishment of four months of confinement and associated penalties in a case involving virtual child pornography).
Subsequent to Appellant's trial -- and subsequent to Mason, Leonard, and Beaty -- the Manual for Courts-Martial was amended to address expressly actual images and virtual images (i.e., images of "what appear[] to be minors," Beaty, 70 M.J. at 40, 43). See Manual for Courts-Martial, United States Analysis of the Punitive Articles app. 23 at A23-22 (2012 ed.) (MCM). Under the amended version of the Manual, which is now in effect, actual and virtual images are treated as the same for punishment purposes. MCM pt. IV, para. 68b.c.(1). Offenses such as possessing, receiving, and viewing child pornography are subject to a maximum of ten years of confinement per offense, regardless of whether the images are of actual children or images of virtual children. Id. at para. 68b.e.(1). Periods of greater confinement are authorized for offenses involving aggravating circumstances: fifteen years for possession with intent to distribute, twenty years for distribution; and thirty years for production. Id. at paras. 68b.e.(2)-(4). The new rules, which equate actual and virtual child pornography, reflect the reality of modern imaging technology. Persons with only modest skills can produce virtual images that, from the perspective of the viewer, are infused with such vitality that they "appear to be" real.
But Appellant was not tried under the new rules. At the time he was tried, the offenses involving actual and virtual images were not equated. Instead, the penalty landscape presented vast differences in authorized punishments on the two specifications involving child pornography offenses. At the time of Appellant's trial, the two offenses at issue carried an authorized punishment of thirty years of confinement for the distribution and possession of actual images, but only eight months of confinement for images involving virtual depictions.
 Consideration of the relationship between actual and virtual images during Appellant's trial
Given the vast disparity in the consequences associated with the offenses under the law in effect at that time, it was incumbent upon the military judge to engage in a plea colloquy that accurately informed Appellant of the nature of the offenses and the penalty landscape. See R.C.M. 910(c)(1). In this case, the military judge erroneously told Appellant that it would make no difference whether the images were actual or virtual. Finch,     M.J. at     (5). In so doing, he left Appellant with the misleading impression that there was no legal difference between actual and virtual images when, in fact, the difference was dramatic. At no point did the military judge provide any information to Appellant to rectify this error.
An error by the military judge in misadvising an accused on matters affecting the maximum sentence does not necessarily amount to the type of substantial misunderstanding that will invalidate a plea. See, e.g., United States v. Walker, 34 M.J. 264, 266 (C.M.A. 1992). The analysis is contextual. Id.
The majority concludes that there was no substantial misunderstanding, viewing the record as demonstrating a context in which all present understood that the case involved images of actual children. In support of this proposition, the majority cites defense counsel's agreement with the military judge that the maximum punishment was thirty years. Finch,     M.J. at     (12-13). Defense counsel, however, did not object to or correct the military judge and did not offer any views as to the considerable differences between actual and virtual images. To the extent that the exchange between the defense counsel and the military judge proves anything, it merely demonstrates that the defense counsel and the military judge shared the same misunderstanding of the relationship between actual and virtual images -- a matter involving a vast difference in the penalty landscape and that was never explained on the record to Appellant.
The majority also cites the use of phrases in the plea colloquy such as "person," "child,"  "underage," "individuals . . . [whose] bodies were not developed," and "minors engaging in sexually explicit conduct" as demonstrating an understanding by the military judge and Appellant that the colloquy involved actual rather than virtual images. Id. at     (13-14). The military judge's own words refute the majority's theory. He expressly used the words "persons" in describing virtual pornography when he erroneously equated actual and virtual images by referring to "visual depictions containing sexually explicit images of persons indistinguishable from minor children, whether actual or virtual." Id. at     (5) (emphasis added).
In that context, where the military judge expressly advised Appellant that virtual images constituted depictions of "persons indistinguishable from minor children," nothing in Appellant's use of similar words would provide a basis for concluding that Appellant was referring only to actual children. Id. Given the graphic reality that can be achieved in the production of virtual images, the fact that participants in a plea colloquy used such language does not demonstrate that they were referring to actual or virtual images.
The current Manual for Courts-Martial repeatedly uses similar words to describe both actual and virtual images. See, e.g., MCM pt. IV, para. 68b.c.(1) (defining child pornography as the "visual depiction of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct"); id. at para. 68b.c.(4) (defining a minor as a "person under the age of 18 years"); id. at para. 68b.c.(7) (defining various forms of sexually explicit conduct as occurring "between persons of the same or opposite sex" or involving "lascivious exhibition of the genitals or pubic area of any person").
The amended Manual does not govern the case before us, but the use of such language in the current Manual to describe both actual and virtual images -- like the use of such words by the military judge at trial -- refutes the majority's view that the plain meaning of such words refers only to actual images. The Manual, in its routine use of words like "individuals" and "persons" to describe both actual and virtual images of sexual conduct, demonstrates that the plain meaning of these words can encompass both. The use of these words during the plea colloquy does not demonstrate either an express or implicit understanding by the military judge or Appellant that the images at issue in the present case only involved images of actual children.
The defective plea inquiry in this case involves a set of circumstances that would not affect a plea under current law. The plea inquiry in this case, however, demonstrates a substantial and uncorrected error by the military judge with respect to the law at the time of Appellant's trial, rendering the plea improvident. Under these circumstances, the Court should set aside the findings and sentence, and remand the case for a rehearing.

 

