, concurring in the judgment.
Because I do not find that the district court clearly erred in the essential holdings of its opinion, I concur in the judgment. I write separately because my analysis of the district court's findings and my application of the clearly erroneous standard differs from that of the Court.
We review the district court's factual findings for clear error. Harvell, 71 F.3d at 1386. "Using this standard, we will overturn a factual finding only if it is not supported by substantial evidence in the record, if it is based on an erroneous view of the law, or if we are left with the definite and firm conviction that an error was made." United States v. Vertac Chemical Corp., 453 F.3d 1031,     (8th Cir. 2006) (quotation omitted). Under this standard, affirmance may be proper regardless of whether "we agree with the district court's interpretation of the evidence and the expert testimony." Ante at 10; see also ante at 2, 9, 11. We instead review the district court's factual findings only to ascertain whether the district court's interpretation of the facts is a permissible one, as "[a] district court's choice between two permissible views of  the evidence cannot be clearly erroneous." Vertac, 453 F.3d at     (qutoation omitted); see also Cottier, 445 F.3d at 1123-24 (Colloton, J., dissenting) ("To preserve the benefit of the trial court's particular familiarity with the indigenous political reality, we apply a clear error standard of review both to the predicate factual determinations and to the ultimate finding regarding vote dilution.") (internal quotations and alterations omitted).
I. The Gingles Preconditions
The Court's opinion adequately describes the Gingles preconditions. See ante at 4-6. While I cannot join the Court's analysis of the Gingles preconditions, I concur in its conclusion. I set forth what I find to be the proper analysis of the issues below.
A. The First Gingles Precondition 
Under the first Gingles precondition, Bone Shirt must show that Indians constitute a minority that is sufficiently large and geographically compact to constitute a majority in a single-member district. Gingles, 478 U.S. at 50. This first precondition focuses upon whether the district court can "fashion a permissible remedy in the particular context of the challenged system." Sanchez v. Colorado, 97 F.3d 1303, 1311 (10th Cir. 1996) (quoting Nipper v. Smith, 39 F.3d 1494, 1530-31 (11th Cir. 1994)). If no "proper and workable remedy exists," then a plaintiff's claims fail as a matter of law. Cottier, 445 F.3d at 1117. In Cottier, this Court sustained redistricting plans under the first Gingles precondition so long as the proposed plans offered Indians a "more reasonable opportunity" to elect representatives of their choice. Id.
The State contends that the district court erroneously determined that Indians need not have a supermajority in the newly-created district. This Court rejected a similar argument in Cottier. Id. The question is whether the minority population has an "equal opportunity" to elect its preferred candidate, not whether it will actually muster the votes to do so. League of United Latin Am. Citizens v. Perry, 126 S. Ct. 2594, 2615-16, 165 L. Ed. 2d 609 (2006). In any event, the State's argument is beside the point, as Bone Shirt demonstrated that there were five potential remedial plans that gave Indians a supermajority of over 65 percent in the new District 26, the remedial district. As such, I cannot say that the district court clearly erred when it concluded that Indians constituted a minority that was sufficiently large and compact to constitute a majority in a single-member district. In addition, the Court accurately described the proposed remedial districts, ante at 8, and I likewise conclude that the proposed remedial districts are not themselves racial gerrymanders.
B. The Second and Third Gingles Preconditions 
Gingles's second precondition required Bone Shirt to show that Indians are politically cohesive. Gingles, 478 U.S. at 51. "A showing that a significant number of minority group members usually vote for the same candidates is one way of proving the political cohesiveness necessary to a vote dilution claim, and, consequently, establishes minority bloc voting within the context of § 2." Id. (internal citation omitted). The third Gingles precondition requires a plaintiff to demonstrate that "the white majority votes sufficiently as a bloc to enable it--in the absence of special circumstances, such as the minority candidate running unopposed--usually to defeat the minority's preferred candidate." Gingles, 478 U.S. at 51 (internal citation omitted).
 Much of the argument before the district court and in this Court addressed whether the statistical methods employed by Bone Shirt's expert, Dr. Steven Cole, were sufficiently reliable. Cole employed bivariate ecological regression analysis ("BERA") and homogenous precinct analysis ("HPA"). The State's expert, Dr. Zax, employed ecological inference ("EI") or "King's Method." Using BERA and HPA, Cole determined that Indian voters are highly cohesive; that is, Indians tend to vote for the same candidates. The district court accepted Cole's BERA-based statistical analysis, even though "Cole admitted that [his] equation contains an error [and that] the effect of that error is unknown." 336 F. Supp. 2d at 1001-02. The Court points out that BERA has "long been accepted" by the courts. Ante at 9-10.
I find it difficult to rely upon a statistical method that incorporates an admittedly erroneous equation that yields a result with an error of unknown quantity and effect. Daubert specifically requires a district court to consider "the known or potential rate of error" of the scientific method utilized by testifying experts. 509 U.S. at 594. It is difficult to weigh this factor in Daubert's analysis if "the effect of that error is unknown." 336 F. Supp. 2d at 1002. Nor am I persuaded that previous acceptance of BERA results permanently decides the matter. Science evolves, and scientific methods that were once considered unassailable truths have been discarded over time. Unreliable testimony based upon those outdated theories and methods must be discarded as well, lest scientific stare decisis ensure that such theories survive only in court. It may be that the validity of some scientific methods need not be constantly reestablished in case after case, but a statistical method that contains an apparently unquantified error would not be one of them. If Cole's BERA-based testimony were the only basis for the district court's opinion, I would likely hold that its conclusions were unsupported by competent evidence.
Nevertheless, I do not find that the district court clearly erred when it found that Indians vote sufficiently cohesively and the white majority voted as a bloc to usually defeat the minority preferred candidate ("MPC"), thereby establishing the second and third Gingles preconditions. As the district court correctly noted, "all three methods employed by the parties' experts in this case generate sufficiently similar results." Id. at 1004. In other words, Cole's BERA and HPA-based results and Zax's EI-based results are substantially similar. While the State contends that this is not the case, the analysis it presents in its brief is based upon a misunderstanding of the proper approach to the issue.
First, the State's expert used an approach that conflates the second and third Gingles preconditions. According to the State's brief, "dilution may be found when there is first, racial polarization and, second, in a case in which there is racial polarization, the minority candidate loses." The State further refines its approach by arguing that a particular race does not qualify as "polarized" unless at least 60 percent of Indians voted for the MPC and at least 60 percent of the white majority voted against him. But there is no support for this approach, as no Gingles precondition asks whether the white majority is also cohesive. To the contrary, the questions under Gingles's second and third preconditions are whether the minority votes cohesively and whether "the white majority votes sufficiently as a bloc" in most elections to defeat the candidate that the cohesive minority population prefers. Gingles, 478 U.S. at 51. Nothing in the case law prescribes that the white majority bloc must be of a certain size beyond the requirement that  the bloc be large enough to defeat the MPC. As such, Dr. Zax's assumption that only races where at least 60 percent of the white majority votes for the same candidate improperly skews his results.
Second, the State diluted the proper analysis by relying heavily upon election results in races in other districts and for other offices, known as exogenous elections. As we have held previously, endogenous results are preferable to exogenous ones. Cottier, 445 F.3d at 1121. Moreover, the district court clearly found that endogenous results were preferable to exogenous results, and the State did not attack that finding in its appeal.
The State also relied heavily upon results from District 27 when arguing that the white majority does not usually defeat the MPC. But it is hardly shocking that the white population usually cannot vote as a bloc sufficient to defeat the MPC in District 27--a district created to ensure that Indians could elect their MPC and where Indians enjoy a large supermajority. Contrary to the State's argument, the precedent addressing this issue makes clear that courts must focus on election results from the majority-white district. See, e.g., Gingles, 478 U.S. at 51 (holding that the minority proves the third precondition by showing that "submergence in a white multimember district impedes its ability to elect its chosen representatives" because the district's "white majority" votes sufficiently as a bloc) (emphases added); see also League of United Latin Amer. Citizens, 126 S. Ct. at 2616 ("The Court has rejected the premise that a State can always make up for the less-than-equal opportunity of some individuals by providing greater opportunity to others."); De Grandy, 512 U.S. 997 at 1003-04, 114 S. Ct. 2647, 129 L. Ed. 2d 775 (holding that the third precondition was satisfied by "a tendency of non-Hispanic whites to vote as a bloc to bar minority groups from electing their chosen candidates except in a district where a given minority makes up a voting majority") (emphasis added).
If the State's approach were correct, packing would be both the problem and the solution--i.e., having illegally packed Indians into one district, the State could then point out that Indians are sometimes able to elect their preferred candidate in the packed district. See Old Person, 230 F.3d at 1122 (noting that this approach "would permit white bloc voting in a majority-white district to be washed clean by electoral success in neighboring majority-Indian districts"). As the case law illustrates, the State's approach to the issue is inappropriate.
In this case, then, the elections that speak to this critical issue are those in District 26, the "white majority" district in question. And, at bottom, when analyzed under the proper framework, both experts' analyses using all three methods--BERA, HPA and EI--support the conclusion that the Indians vote cohesively in that district and that the white majority usually votes as a bloc to defeat the MPC. As such, the district court did not clearly err when it held that the second and third Gingles preconditions had been met.
 II. Totality of the Circumstances
The district court analyzed all the Senate factors, as well as two additional factors often considered in Section 2 cases. See ante at 11-12. The district court's weighing of the totality of the circumstances, like its factual findings, is subject to clear error review. Stabler, 129 F.3d 1015 at 1023. 
The Court's opinion analyzes only two of the Senate factors, the extent of racially polarized voting and the extent to which minorities have been elected, reasoning that these two factors "predominate" the analysis. Id. at 12-13. Without analyzing  the remainder of the factors, the Court then cites a 1981 case from this Circuit involving South Dakota and holds that "the record is clear that South Dakota's history of discrimination against Native-Americans has limited their ability to succeed in the state political process." Id. at 13. After reviewing the district court's Senate-factor findings and its weighing of those factors, I believe that the issue of whether the totality of the circumstances indicates that South Dakota violated Section Two is a closer call than reflected in the Court's opinion. Nevertheless, I conclude that the district court did not clearly err when it determined that "based on the totality of the circumstances, it [has been] shown that . . . [members of a protected group] have less opportunity than other members of the electorate to participate in the political process and to elect representatives of their choice." 42 U.S.C. § 1973(b) .
I would, however, find that the district court's analysis of several of the Senate factors was clearly erroneous. First, the district court erroneously concluded that South Dakota uses voting procedures that enhance the opportunity for discrimination. The district court first found that South Dakota "has taken measures to simplify voting procedures and promote access to the political process [and that] these laws and practices decrease opportunities for discrimination." 336 F. Supp. 2d at 1037. Nevertheless, the district court concluded that South Dakota's use of multimember districts in District 26 and District 27 outweigh South Dakota's efforts to ensure Indian access to the polls. Id. The district court's conclusion on this factor is unsupported by any analysis or evidence. Moreover, it is difficult to see how the use of multimember districts in District 27, which has a super majority of Indians, hurts Indian efforts to elect their preferred candidates. As the lack of Indian voters in District 26 forms the basis for Bone Shirt's claim, it is unclear from the evidence whether the use of multimember districts in fact adds to that injury, as there may just be too few Indians in District 26 irrespective of whether it is a single or multimember district. As the district court's opinion does not represent a choice between two permissible views of the evidence, but is instead a conclusion unsupported by substantial evidence, I would hold that it clearly erred when analyzing this factor.
Second, the district court found that, although there is no formal candidate slating process in South Dakota, there is an informal one, and it worked in one instance to harm Indian interests when a Democratic committee chairman campaigned against the MPC, who was running as a Democrat. Id. Again, the district court's conclusion is unsupportable, as the factor concentrates first upon whether there is a candidate slating process. At most, the district court found that there is an informal one. Id. This then means that the process is more open than if there were a formal slating process that worked consistently against Indian interests. While it is unclear whether an informal slating process is relevant to the Senate factor, a single instance where, for whatever reason, a party chairman chose not to support his party's candidate is an insufficient basis upon which to determine that Indians have been "denied access to that [slating] process." Gingles, 478 U.S. at 37. The district court's finding in this regard is clearly erroneous.
Third, the district court's conclusion that racial appeals have been used in South Dakota's elections, 336 F. Supp. 2d at 1041, was also clearly erroneous. As support for its conclusion, the district court primarily cited news stories concerning alleged Indian voter fraud. Id. The district court's opinion does not reflect that any of the  stories originated from a particular campaign, that they were meant to incite antiIndian sentiment or that they were meant to motivate white voters to reject Indian candidates. Moreover, the fact that the news media reported that one non-Indian politician chose an Indian running mate is not evidence of a racial appeal, much less a racial appeal that is detrimental to Indians. This evidence does not support the district court's conclusion that racial appeals have been used in South Dakota elections. Therefore, because the finding is unsupported by evidence, I would find that it was clearly erroneous.
One other portion of the district court's analysis is problematic despite its factual accuracy. A very significant portion of the district court's conclusion that there was a "long and extensive history" of discrimination that affects the voting rights of Indians in South Dakota is predicated upon early South Dakota and American history, including denial of the right of Indians to vote by Congress in the 1860s. 336 F. Supp. 2d at 1034. Because Indians have had the right to vote under particular circumstances since at least the 1890s and have had the universal right to do so for over half a century, this evidence is far from dispositive. Nor am I persuaded that particular witnesses' anecdotes about perceived slights at the polls would be sufficient to sustain the district court's opinion on this issue. Nevertheless, there was also evidence of more recent discrimination, including purposeful efforts to deny Indians the right to vote in various jurisdictions in South Dakota, id. at 1023-24, and I cannot conclude that the district court clearly erred when it determined that this factor weighed in Bone Shirt's favor.
Although the district court's conclusion with respect to three of the Senate factors was clearly erroneous, its conclusion respecting the other nine factors it analyzed was not. Importantly, this includes its conclusion concerning the two "primary factors," Harvell, 71 F.3d at 1390--the existence of polarized voting and the lack of Indian elected officials. In my view, the district court's analysis of these remaining Senate factors constitutes a "choice between two permissible views of the evidence," Vertac, 453 F.3d at    , and I cannot therefore say that its analysis is clearly erroneous. As we have held previously, "Congress made clear . . . that the factors identified in the legislative history are not exhaustive . . . and that there is no formula for aggregating the factors." Buckanaga v. Sisseton Indep. Sch. Dist. No. 54-5, 804 F.2d 469, 471 (8th Cir. 1986). In accord with this reality, no court has ever determined how many of the factors must be present or in what combination. Under these circumstances, I cannot say that the district court's overall weighing of the totality of the circumstances was clearly erroneous.
 III. Remedy
After South Dakota declined to submit a remedial plan, the district court adopted the ACLU's "Remedial Plan 1." 387 F. Supp. 2d at 1038-39. The State argues on appeal that the remedial plan is retrogressive in that it hurts the opportunity of Indians in District 27 to elect the candidates of their choice, it is facially impermissible under Section Five of the Voting Rights Act and it must be submitted to the Department of Justice or a three judge panel for clearance.
In his brief, Bone Shirt pointed out that the State did not make its retrogression and Section Five arguments before the district court. The State did not dispute that characterization in its reply. Accordingly, I would find that the State failed to preserve these arguments for appeal. See, e.g., AIG Centennial Ins. Co. v. Fraley-Landers,  450 F.3d 761, 767 (8th Cir. 2006) ("We generally do not consider arguments presented for the first time on appeal . . . .").
Nor am I persuaded that the district court was required to seek preclearance from the Department of Justice or a three judge panel for its proposed redistricting plan. As the Supreme Court interpreted Section Five in the context of a judicially-ordered redistricting plan, the redistricting plan need not be submitted for preclearance unless the plan was created by the relevant legislative body. McDaniel, 452 U.S. at 153 ("As we construe the congressional mandate, it requires that whenever a covered jurisdiction submits a proposal reflecting the policy choices of the elected representatives of the people--no matter what constraints have limited the choices available to them--the preclearance requirement of the Voting Rights Act is applicable."). Here, the adopted plan does not reflect South Dakota's redistricting choices. Indeed, South Dakota explicitly refused to offer any remedial redistricting plan. Accordingly, the district court need not have sought preclearance.
 IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the district court. Accordingly, I concur in the judgment.  

 

