, dissenting.
The question presented in this case, as the Court defines it, is whether Vincent's 1994 conviction for possession of a sawed-off shotgun in violation of section 5-73-104 of the Arkansas Code qualifies as a "violent felony" under the Armed Career Criminal Act. In my view, the Supreme Court's decision in Begay v. United States, 553 U.S. 137, 128 S. Ct. 1581, 170 L. Ed. 2d 490 (2008), compels us to find that simple possession of a sawed-off shotgun does not qualify as a violent felony because the crime itself does not involve violent and aggressive conduct. Because the Court reaches a contrary conclusion, I respectfully dissent.
The ACCA provides that a defendant who violates 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) is subject to a mandatory minimum term of fifteen years' imprisonment if he has three previous convictions for a violent felony. See 18 U.S.C. § 924(e)(1). Although Vincent pled guilty to violating § 922(g) and has three previous convictions for felony offenses, he argues that his conviction for violating section 5-73-104 of the Arkansas Code does not qualify as a violent felony. In this context, "violent felony" is a term of art, which the ACCA defines as
any crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year . . . that--
(i) has as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against the person of another; or
(ii) is burglary, arson, or extortion, involves use of explosives, or otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another . . . .
18 U.S.C. § 924(e)(2)(B).
To decide whether a defendant's previous conviction qualifies as a violent felony, a court must first "choose the right category" in which to place the underlying crime. Chambers v. United States, 555 U.S.    , 129 S. Ct. 687, 690, 172 L. Ed. 2d 484 (2009). This so-called categorical approach requires a court "[to] consider the offense generically, that is to say, . . . in terms of how the law defines the offense and not in terms of how an individual offender might  have committed it on a particular occasion." See Begay, 128 S. Ct. at 1584. In this instance, the "right category"--that is, the crime that Vincent committed--is not readily apparent. Cf. Chambers, 129 S. Ct. at 690 ("[S]ometimes the choice [of the right category] is not obvious.").
The Court correctly notes that the Arkansas statute under which Vincent was convicted prohibited possessing a sawed-off shotgun as well as using, making, repairing, selling, or otherwise dealing in a sawed-off shotgun. See Ark. Code Ann. § 5-73-104 (1993). 6  Where a statute "places together in a single numbered . . . section several different kinds of behavior," a reviewing court must decide whether, for purposes of the ACCA, the statute defines "separate crime[s]." Chambers, 129 S. Ct. at 691. If so, the court may "look beyond the complete statutory definition" to sources such as "the charging document, the terms of a plea agreement or transcript of colloquy . . ., or to some comparable judicial record" to determine which crime the defendant committed. United States v. Williams, 537 F.3d 969, 973 (8th Cir. 2008) (second quotation from Shepard v. United States, 544 U.S. 13, 26, 125 S. Ct. 1254, 161 L. Ed. 2d 205 (2005)); see also Chambers, 129 S. Ct. at 691.
The kinds of behavior described in section 5-73-104 constitute different categories of criminal conduct that do not necessarily overlap with one another. For example, although a person must possess a sawed-off shotgun in order to use it, a person need not use a sawed-off shotgun in order to possess it or deal in it. Moreover, the different kinds of behavior described in section 5-73-104 pose varying degrees of risk to others. For example, using a sawed-off shotgun (e.g., firing it) is more likely to result in death or physical injury to another than simply possessing a sawed-off shotgun (i.e., without using it) or dealing in a sawed-off shotgun (e.g., selling it). Given these differences, I would find that section 5-73-104 defines at least three separate crimes: using a sawed-off shotgun, possessing a sawed-off shotgun, and dealing in a sawed-off shotgun. 7  On the present record, it is not possible to determine which of these crimes Vincent committed, for Vincent was charged with unlawfully using, possessing, or dealing in a sawed-off shotgun. 8  Accordingly, I would vacate Vincent's sentence and remand to allow the district court to decide, in the first instance, the particular crime that underlies Vincent's previous conviction. Cf. Williams, 537 F.3d at 973 (remanding to allow the district court to "consider permissible materials, as per Shepard, and determine the particular offense" underlying the defendant's previous conviction for "auto theft").
The Court purports to isolate the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun from the other two crimes included in the charging document based on its observation that "[t]hroughout this litigation, all participants, including Vincent, have characterized the disputed conviction as possession of a sawed-off shotgun." Ante at 6. On the contrary, our original opinion reported that "[c]ertified copies of the information and judgment establish that Vincent used or possessed [a sawed-off shotgun]." United States v. Vincent, 519 F.3d 732, 733 (8th Cir. 2008) (emphasis added), vacated, 555 U.S. ___, 129 S. Ct. 996, 173 L. Ed. 2d 289 (2009); see also id. (suggesting that Vincent's previous conviction "involved his use of a sawed-off shotgun" (emphasis added)). In any event, the parties had no reason to quibble over the distinction between the crimes of using and possessing a sawed-off shotgun because, before Begay, that distinction would not have changed the outcome of the ACCA inquiry. Compare id. at 734 (holding that "Vincent's prior conviction for criminal use of a [sawed-off shotgun] is a violent felony"), with United States v. Allegree, 175 F.3d 648, 651 (8th Cir. 1999) (holding that a conviction for possession of a sawed-off shotgun qualifies as a "crime of violence" under U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2, which we have interpreted to have the same meaning as the term "violent felony" under the ACCA), and United States v. Childs, 403 F.3d 970, 971 (8th Cir. 2005) (holding that a juvenile conviction for "possession of a short-barreled shotgun is a violent felony"). After Begay, however, the distinction between the crimes of using and possessing a sawed-off shotgun becomes dispositive; for if Vincent was convicted of simple possession of a sawed-off shotgun--which itself does not involve violent and aggressive conduct--I am convinced that Begay compels us to find that his conviction does not qualify as a violent felony.
There is no dispute that Vincent's 1994 conviction qualifies as a felony because it was punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year. See § 5-73-104 (providing that criminal possession of a prohibited weapon is a "Class B felony if the weapon is a bomb, machine gun, or firearm specially made or specially adapted for silent discharge," but otherwise is a "Class D felony"); Ark. Code Ann. § 5-4-401(a)(5) (1993) ("For a Class D felony, the sentence shall not exceed six (6) years . . . ."). But the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun does not "[have] as an element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against the person of another." Cf. § 924(e)(2)(B)(i). Likewise, the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun is not "burglary, arson, or extortion," and does not "involve[] use of explosives." Cf. § 924(e)(2)(B)(ii). The question, then, comes down to whether the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun fits within the residual clause of the ACCA, which encompasses certain crimes that "involve[] conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another." See id.
Before Begay, our cases interpreting the residual clause "focused solely on the degree of risk of physical injury associated with a crime." Williams, 537 F.3d at 972 (collecting cases). This approach is no longer permissible, notwithstanding our pre-Begay precedents, for the Supreme Court has made clear "that the degree of risk of physical injury is only half of the analysis." Id. After Begay, a crime fits within the residual clause only if it "pose[s] a similar degree of risk of physical injury as the example crimes and [is] similar in kind to the example crimes." Id. (emphasis  added). We have observed that the Supreme Court "elucidated the similar-in-kind requirement by noting [that] the examples 'all typically involve purposeful, violent, and aggressive conduct.'" United States v. Gordon, 557 F.3d 623, 625 (8th Cir. 2009) (quoting Begay, 128 S. Ct. at 1586). And we have therefore held that an offense "may qualify" as a violent felony under the residual clause if it (1) "involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another" and (2) "typically involve[s] purposeful, violent, and aggressive conduct." Id. at 626.
I will assume that the Court is correct that the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another. See ante at 8. I will further assume that the Court is correct that the crime typically involves purposeful conduct, though I do not join the Court in suggesting that any mens rea requirement, including recklessness, is sufficiently similar to the purposeful conduct typically involved in committing the example crimes. See ante at 8. Despite these assumptions, I cannot agree with the conclusion that simple possession of a sawed-off shotgun involves violent and aggressive conduct.
The crux of the Court's explanation for its conclusion seems to be that, "[l]ike the listed crimes, possession of a sawed-off shotgun is illegal precisely because it enables violence or the threat of violence." Ante at 8. In my view, the Court's explanation fails to answer the question we asked in Williams, Gordon, and our other post-Begay precedents: whether the crime itself typically involves violent and aggressive conduct. This subtle difference in terminology has significant consequences; after all, many crimes that do not themselves involve violent and aggressive conduct may nevertheless enable violence or the threat of violence.
Consider in this regard the crime of possessing explosives, which clearly enables violence or the threat of violence, yet does not appear to be sufficiently similar in kind to crimes involving use of explosives, which are among the comparators enumerated in the residual clause. Cf. United States v. Flores, 477 F.3d 431, 436 (6th Cir. 2007) ("[T]ellingly, the [ACCA] provides that the use--rather than the possession--of explosives is conduct that rises to the level of a violent felony."). The core difference between criminal use and criminal possession--whether of an explosive device or a sawed-off shotgun--is that use typically involves violent and aggressive conduct, while simple possession merely creates a potential for violence and aggression that is ordinarily realized only if possession ripens into use. In many instances, perhaps including Vincent's previous conviction, criminal possession never ripens into criminal use and so never results in violence or aggression. Even if criminal possession ripens into criminal use more often than not, that would not mean that possession itself involves violent and aggressive conduct, only that possession often precedes the separate crime of using a sawed-off shotgun, which typically does involve violent and aggressive conduct. 9  
Similarly, it may be true, as an empirical matter, that criminal possession of a sawed-off shotgun is frequently discovered in connection with a violent offense, such  as armed robbery or brandishing a firearm. But the happenstance of how criminal possession is discovered cannot tell us whether possession itself typically involves violent and aggressive conduct. Under the categorical approach, our focus is limited to the "statutory definition" of the crime at hand, Gordon, 557 F.3d at 626, which forecloses a roving inquiry into the totality of the circumstances associated with the crime, or how the crime "might be committed on a particular occasion," id. at 626 n.3 (quoting Williams, 537 F.3d at 972 n.1). As a result, if the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun itself does not involve violent and aggressive conduct, then it makes no difference whether it is frequently discovered in connection with a different offense (e.g., armed robbery or brandishing a firearm) that is violent and aggressive. 10  
In effect, the Court's holding risks expanding the ACCA's residual clause to include any crime that has a hypothetical connection to violence. Part of the conceptual difficulty may stem from the Supreme Court's introduction of the terms "violent" and "aggressive" in Begay without defining them or "explain[ing] in other than conclusory [language] why [the crime of driving under the influence] was not violent or aggressive." United States v. Herrick, 545 F.3d 53, 58 (1st Cir. 2008). The First Circuit has attempted to clear up the resulting confusion by announcing workable definitions of "violent" and "aggressive" that comport with the ordinary meaning of those terms. In particular, the court defined "violent" as "marked by extreme force or sudden intense activity," id. (quoting Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 1396 (11th ed. 2003)), and defined "aggressive" as "tending toward or exhibiting aggression," which the court in turn defined as "a forceful action or procedure (as an unprovoked attack)[,] esp[ecially] when intended to dominate or master," id. (quoting Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 24 (11th ed. 2003)).
Once the question is properly framed and the relevant terms are expressly defined, it becomes plain that simple possession of a sawed-off shotgun itself does not involve violent and aggressive conduct in the manner of burglary, arson, extortion, or criminal use of explosives. Indeed, to say that simple possession of a weapon is "marked by extreme force or sudden intense activity" or exhibits "a forceful action . . . intended to dominate or master" would strain the ordinary meaning of the terms violent and aggressive. 11  
 The Court draws support for its conclusion from two additional sources of "persuasive authority," both of which I find unpersuasive. First, the Court relies on the U.S. Sentencing Commission's commentary to U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2 as authority for the proposition that "the kinds of risks posed by sawed-off shotguns render possession a 'crime of violence' under the [guidelines], and accordingly, a 'violent felony' under the ACCA." Ante at 10 (emphasis added). It bears repeating that in the post-Begay world, the potential risk of physical injury to another is "only half of the analysis." Williams, 537 F.3d at 972. The commentary to § 4B1.2 has nothing to say about the other half of the analysis, which necessitates distinguishing between crimes that typically involve purposeful, violent, and aggressive conduct and crimes that do not. 12  Thus, to the extent this case hinges on whether the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun involves violent and aggressive conduct, the commentary to § 4B1.2 has little or no persuasive value.
Second, the Court relies on United States v. Zuniga, 553 F.3d 1330 (10th Cir. 2009), petition for cert. filed,     U.S.L.W.     (U.S. Apr. 16, 2009) (No. 08-9944), a case in which "the Tenth Circuit held that a prisoner's possession of a weapon was roughly similar, in kind as well as degree of risk, to the § 924(e) listed crimes," ante at 10 (citing Zuniga, 553 F.3d at 1334-36). According to the Court, the Tenth Circuit concluded that the crime of possessing a weapon in prison "is violent and aggressive because it 'creates the possibility--even the likelihood--of a future violent confrontation.'" Ante at 11 (quoting Zuniga, 553 F.3d at 1335). I think the Court's reliance on Zuniga is misplaced, mostly because the Tenth Circuit answers a different question than the one we asked in Williams, Gordon, and our other post-Begay precedents. The better approach is to follow our own precedents by looking to whether the crime of possessing a sawed-off shotgun itself typically involves violent and aggressive conduct, not merely whether it is one link in a chain leading to a possibility or a likelihood of violence that may or may not materialize into actual violence or aggression in the future.
For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent.

 

