, concurring in the judgment. After Miranda v. County of Lake, 900 F.3d 335 (7th Cir. 2018), it makes sense as  a doctrinal matter to extend Kingsley's objective standard to all conditions-of-confinement claims by pretrial detainees. As my colleagues explain, when a jail official harms a pretrial detainee, the constitutional right in question is the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of due process, not the Eighth Amendment's protection against cruel and unusual punishment. In Kingsley v. Hendrickson, 135 S. Ct. 2466, 2470-71, 192 L. Ed. 2d 416 (2015), the Supreme Court confronted a pretrial detainee's claim that jail officers used excessive force against him. The Court explained that the plaintiff's due-process claim entailed two state-of-mind questions:
The first concerns the defendant's state of mind with respect to his physical acts—i.e., his state of mind with respect to the bringing about of certain physical consequences in the world. The second question concerns the defendant's state of mind with respect to whether his use of force was "excessive."
Id. at 2472.
As to the first question, the Court reiterated the rule that negligently inflicted harm is not actionable as a constitutional violation; rather, "the defendant must possess a purposeful, a knowing, or possibly a reckless state of mind." Id. That point was not disputed; the officers did not deny that they deliberately used force against the plaintiff. Id. As to the second question—"the defendant's state of mind with respect to the proper interpretation of the force ... that the defendant deliberately (not accidentally or negligently) used"—the Court ruled that the plaintiff need not establish that the officers subjectively intended to use excessive force. Id. Rather, at this step of the decision framework, the Court held that an objective inquiry applies. Id. at 2472-73. A pretrial detainee can prevail on an excessive-force claim by proving that the force deliberately used against him was objectively unreasonable—namely, by providing "objective evidence that the challenged governmental action is not rationally related to a legitimate governmental objective or that it is excessive in relation to that purpose." Id. at 2473-74.
In Miranda we extended Kingsley's "objective unreasonableness" standard to a claim that a pretrial detainee received constitutionally inadequate medical care. 900 F.3d at 352-54. We emphasized, however, that Kingsley retained the rule that mere negligence is not a constitutional violation. Id. at 353-54. Miranda involved the death of a mentally ill jail inmate who refused food and water. Her estate sued the jail officials and medical providers involved in her care. To prevail against the medical providers, the estate was required to prove that they "acted purposefully, knowingly, or perhaps ... recklessly when they considered the consequences of their handling of [her] case." Id. at 353. The estate's evidence was sufficient to support an inference that the medical providers "made the decision to continue observing [the inmate] in the jail, rather than transporting her to the hospital, with purposeful, knowing, or reckless disregard of the consequences." Id. at 354. Accordingly, we held that "a jury must decide whether the doctors' deliberate failure to act was objectively reasonable." Id.
Like my colleagues, I see no principled reason to treat general conditions-of-confinement claims differently than medical conditions-of-confinement claims. I therefore agree that this case is governed by Kingsley's objective standard—but importantly, only at the step in the liability framework that requires an interpretation of the conditions to which the plaintiffs were subjected during the three-day water shutoff. As I've just explained, under  Kingsley the constitutional claim still carries a subjective component. To prevail, the plaintiffs must prove that the defendants acted purposefully, knowingly, or recklessly; negligence is not enough. In addition, nothing in Kingsley removed the threshold requirement in every conditions-of-confinement claim: "the inmate must show that he is incarcerated under conditions posing a substantial risk of serious harm." Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 834, 114 S. Ct. 1970, 128 L. Ed. 2d 811 (1994). That's because only "objectively [and] sufficiently serious" deprivations are actionable as a violation of the Constitution. Id. (quotation marks omitted). Typically, this refers to the denial of life's basic necessities, such as "adequate food, clothing, shelter, and medical care." Id. at 832.
So to prevail on a claim alleging unconstitutional conditions of pretrial confinement, the plaintiff must prove three elements: (1) the conditions in question are or were objectively serious (or if the claim is for inadequate medical care, his medical condition is or was objectively serious); (2) the defendant acted purposefully, knowingly, or recklessly with respect to the consequences of his actions; and (3) the defendant's actions were objectively unreasonable—that is, "not rationally related to a legitimate governmental objective or ... excessive in relation to that purpose." Kingsley, 135 S. Ct. at 2473-74.
With these understandings, I agree that the qualified-immunity defense fails at this early stage of the litigation. Qualified immunity is normally hard to win on a Rule 12(b)(6) motion. See, e.g., Reed v. Palmer, 906 F.3d 540, 548-49 (7th Cir. 2018). This case is no exception. The factual allegations in the complaint describe a three-day water shutoff in the Lake County Jail in which the plaintiffs and other inmates were deprived of the minimal amount of water necessary to stay hydrated, take medication, maintain basic hygiene, and flush waste from their cell toilets. The complaint further alleges that as a result of the deteriorating conditions during the three-day shutdown, the plaintiffs and other inmates suffered "a variety of ailments, including but not limited to, dehydration, migraine headaches, sickness, dizziness, constipation, and general malaise." Finally, the complaint alleges that the defendants intentionally and with deliberate indifference subjected the plaintiffs and other inmates to these conditions. I agree with my colleagues that these allegations state a claim for "denial of the minimal civilized measure of life's necessities," Farmer, 511 U.S. at 834 (quotation marks omitted), a clearly established constitutional violation. Majority Op. at pp. 5-6.
The defendants say they had a legitimate purpose for shutting off the water (to replace a water pump) and the ensuing conditions in the jail were not excessive in relation to that purpose. As my colleagues note, the factual basis for this argument lies outside the complaint. Regardless, we cannot evaluate the defendants' response to the water-pump contingency without a factual record. At this stage we take the allegations in the complaint as true, and the plaintiffs are entitled to all reasonable inferences in their favor. The defendants may of course renew their immunity claim as the facts develop. Reed, 906 F.3d at 548-49 (explaining the difference in the qualified-immunity analysis at the pleadings stage and on summary judgment). For now, the district judge was right to reject the defense.

 

