, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. This case is indistinguishable from Kanter v. Barr, 919 F.3d 437 (7th Cir. 2019), which rejected a Second Amendment challenge to 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1), the felon-dispossession statute, as applied to a person convicted of mail fraud, a nonviolent federal felony. Like Rickey Kanter, Larry Hatfield was convicted of a nonviolent fraud felony: making false statements to obtain federal benefits, 18 U.S.C. § 1001(a). He sued for relief from § 922(g)(1), raising a similar as-applied Second Amendment challenge. A district judge was persuaded and granted relief, but that was before our decision in Kanter.
In its first three paragraphs, the majority opinion succinctly explains why Kanter requires us to reverse. Majority Op. at pp. 1-3. I agree and would end the discussion there. But my colleagues go well beyond a straightforward application of Kanter, reading the Supreme Court's dicta in District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570, 626-27, n.26, 128 S. Ct. 2783, 171 L. Ed. 2d 637 (2008)—that the opinion should not be understood to cast doubt on "presumptively lawful regulatory measures" such as felon-dispossession laws—as lifting the government's burden of justification in as-applied challenges to § 922(g)(1), including as-applied challenges by persons convicted of nonviolent felonies.
That's incorrect under the law of this circuit. Kanter assumed that nonviolent felons are within the scope of the Second Amendment's protections and applied intermediate scrutiny, requiring the government to demonstrate that disarming someone like Rickey Kanter—a person  convicted of a nonviolent fraud felony—is substantially related to an important public-safety interest. 919 F.3d at 447-50. Indeed, Kanter explicitly held that "[t]he government has met its burden in this case." Id. at 448. That holding applies here because Hatfield too was convicted of a nonviolent fraud felony and his case is not meaningfully different. It's enough to say that and be done.
My colleagues go much further, departing from the law of this circuit and altering our framework for resolving Second Amendment challenges—the very framework Kanter faithfully applied. My colleagues hold that in an as-applied challenge to a felon-dispossession law, the plaintiff "bear[s] the burden of production and the risk of non-persuasion." Majority Op. at p. 5. That's precisely the opposite of the approach taken in Kanter—indeed, in all of our post-Heller Second Amendment cases. 919 F.3d at 447-50; see, e.g., United States v. Meza—Rodriguez, 798 F.3d 664, 672-73 (7th Cir. 2015); Ezell v. City of Chicago, 651 F.3d 684, 701-03 (7th Cir. 2011); United States v. Yancey, 621 F.3d 681, 683 (7th Cir. 2010); United States v. Williams, 616 F.3d 685, 692-93 (7th Cir. 2010); United States v. Skoien, 614 F.3d 638, 640 (7th Cir. 2010).
The majority takes this approach based on that now-famous dicta from Heller about "presumptively lawful regulatory measures." But that passage was entirely unexplained and is hard to reconcile with the rest of the Court's opinion. At most (and most plausibly), the passing reference to the "presumptive" validity of felon-dispossession laws implies that § 922(g)(1) is not facially unconstitutional. To say that a law is "presumptively" valid leaves open the possibility of as-applied challenges, and the Heller dicta sheds no doctrinal light on how to deal with an as-applied challenge to a law prohibiting firearm possession. To date, that's how we've read this unelaborated language from Heller, as the cases I've just cited show.
I see no reason to change course. We haven't been asked to do so here. The government did not argue that Hatfield has the burden of production and risk of nonpersuasion. Rather, the government argued that (1) felons as a class are categorically outside the Second Amendment right; and (2) alternatively, it has satisfied its burden of justification under the intermediate standard of scrutiny. This way of framing the analysis is consistent with circuit law, as Kanter itself reflects. There the panel discussed but did not decide the step-one question and instead proceeded directly to step two, applying our established framework and rejecting the as-applied challenge under intermediate scrutiny.
We should simply apply Kanter's holding without further comment. It's not necessary to say more. Breaking new doctrinal ground is especially unwarranted when the appeal is conclusively resolved by existing circuit precedent and no one has sought any change in circuit law. As it stands, most of the majority opinion—almost everything after the application of Kanter—essentially describes rational-basis review, which the Supreme Court has expressly ruled out in Second Amendment cases. Heller, 554 U.S. at 628 n.27 ("If all that was required to overcome the right to keep and bear arms was a rational basis, the Second Amendment would be redundant with the separate constitutional prohibitions on irrational laws, and would have no effect."). Whatever else we might attribute to Heller's enigmatic dicta about "presumptively lawful" firearm regulations, we cannot read it to say something that directly contradicts the Court's clear and emphatic instruction that rational-basis review does  not apply. Accordingly, I join the majority's application of Kanter and its decision to reverse, but that is all.
Kanter controls and resolves this appeal in its entirety. For that reason—and no others—we must reverse.

 

