, concurring. I agree that the Wisconsin Legislature has not made a convincing case for mandatory intervention under Rule 24(a)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. I agree as well that the district judge reasonably exercised his discretion to deny permissive intervention under Rule 24(b)(1). I disagree, however, on a key part of the Rule 24(a)(2) analysis and write separately to explain my reasoning.
 It is common ground that this case involves a novel application of Rule 24's intervention standards. There is no controlling or closely analogous precedent in our circuit, nor is there any guidance in caselaw from other circuits.
Two important legal issues are presented, and the majority opinion frames them up well. The first is how to treat section 803.09(2m) of the Wisconsin Statutes, which gives the Wisconsin Legislature (or either of its constitutive houses) the right to intervene in litigation challenging the constitutionality of a state law. The second is the "gross negligence or bad faith" standard that appears in some of our cases involving intervention motions in litigation against public officials or governmental bodies.
The state statute and the gross-negligence/bad-faith standard represent two sides of an all-or-nothing dilemma. If we defer to the State's policy choice as reflected in the statute, then the Wisconsin Legislature (or the Assembly or Senate alone) is always permitted to intervene of right under Rule 24(a)(2) whenever a state law is challenged. On the other hand, if we apply the highly restrictive gross-negligence/bad-faith standard to assess whether the Attorney General's representation is inadequate—a Rule 24(a)(2) prerequisite—then the Legislature is never permitted to intervene of right.
To borrow a phrase from another context, the gross-negligence/bad-faith standard is strict in theory and fatal in fact.1  No Attorney General or other government lawyer will be so derelict in his duty as to flunk the test. Requiring a showing of gross negligence or bad faith makes intervention of right unavailable in all but the most extreme cases—perhaps only when an Attorney General has gone so far as to refuse to defend a challenged law or take an appeal from an adverse decision. Even in those circumstances, it would be practically impossible to establish gross negligence or bad faith. We can safely assume that any government lawyer worth his salt will be able to offer a plausible justification—whether legal, factual, or prudential—for not mounting a defense or taking an appeal, thus preventing a finding of gross negligence or bad faith. In practice the requirement to show gross negligence or bad faith operates to preclude intervention of right for this entire class of cases. That's hard to reconcile with the language of Rule 24(a)(2), which calls for a contextual, case-specific analysis and does not imply the existence of categorical exclusions.
I will return to this point in a moment, but for now it suffices to say that neither of these extremes is consistent with Rule 24(a)(2). The majority steers clear of the first one, explaining that the State's policy choice as reflected in the statute informs the Rule 24(a)(2) calculus but cannot dictate the outcome. Majority Op. at pp. 4-5. That's clearly correct; intervention in federal court is a question of federal procedural law.
The Legislature doesn't argue otherwise. What it does argue is that even though section 803.09(2m) is not conclusive, it should get very strong deference in federal court as a matter of comity. My colleagues do not specify the weight the statute deserves, and I agree with that approach. Intervention requires a particularized assessment of the intervenor's interest and relationship to the case. A specific  deference rule is inconsistent with that norm.
I'm also in general agreement with the majority's discussion of the nature of the Legislature's interest. Majority Op. at 6-7. But I think it's important to clarify a point we made in Wisconsin Education Association Council v. Walker ("WEAC"), 705 F.3d 640, 658 (7th Cir. 2013), when we said that the intervenor's interest must be "unique." WEAC cited Keith v. Daley, 764 F.2d 1265, 1268 (7th Cir. 1985), as support for the uniqueness requirement. The relevant passage in Keith, however, doesn't use the term "unique." It says this: "The [intervenor's] interest must be based on a right that belongs to the proposed intervenor rather than to an existing party in the suit." Id. In other words, the intervenor's interest must be based on a right that is direct and independent. That much is clear from the immediately preceding sentence: "A proposed intervenor must demonstrate a direct, significant[,] and legally protectable interest in the property [or transaction] at issue in the law suit." Id.
"Unique" is a suitable word to describe the nature of the required interest, but as used in this context, "unique" means an interest that is independent of an existing party's, not different from an existing party's. If the intervenor has a significant independent interest but shares the same goal as an existing party (that is, if their interests align), then the standard for measuring the adequacy of existing representation changes, as WEAC later explains. 705 F.3d at 659 (explaining that a presumption of adequate representation arises when goals align). But sharing the same goal as an existing party doesn't defeat "uniqueness," properly understood. Id.
Applying this understanding, section 803.09(2m) plainly gives the Legislature a direct and independent right to defend state laws in court, and this right is neither derivative of nor subordinate to the Attorney General's. In Wisconsin the Attorney General is a constitutional officer, but his powers and duties are prescribed entirely by statute. State v. City of Oak Creek, 2000 WI 9, 232 Wis. 2d 612, 605 N.W.2d 526, 532 (Wis. 2000) (interpreting art. VI, § 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution). The Attorney General has a statutory duty to defend state laws when they are challenged in court. Id. at 536 (explaining the scope of section 165.25 of the Wisconsin Statutes, which authorizes the Wisconsin Department of Justice to "represent the state, any state department, agency, official, employee or agent" in any civil or criminal matter). By virtue of statutory amendments enacted late last year, the Legislature now has its own independent statutory right to appear in court in defense of state laws. This right is neither attenuated nor insubstantial: section 803.09(2m) reflects a sovereign policy judgment that the Attorney General is not the State's exclusive representative in court when state laws are challenged. Considerations of comity call on us to respect that policy choice.
Accordingly, the basic requirements for intervention as of right are satisfied: The Legislature "claims an interest relating to the property or transaction that is the subject of the action" and "is so situated that disposing of the action may as a practical matter impair or impede [its] ability to protect its interest." Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(a)(2). Judge Conley ruled that because the Legislature shares the same goal as the Attorney General—their shared objective is to defend the challenged abortion regulations—its interest is not "unique," as WEAC requires. That's incorrect, as I've just explained, but his misstep was understandable  given the possible ambiguity in WEAC's use of that term.
My main point of disagreement relates to the majority's decision to apply the "gross negligence or bad faith" standard that this circuit has used in cases involving private parties who seek to intervene on the side of a governmental representative. I have two concerns. First, the standard is incompatible with the text of the rule. Here, in full, is the relevant provision:
(a) Intervention of Right. On timely motion, the court must permit anyone to intervene who:
...
(2) claims an interest relating to the property or transaction that is the subject matter of the action[] and is so situated that disposing of the action may as a practical matter impair or impede the movant's ability to protect its interest, unless existing parties adequately represent that interest.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(a)(2).
This language is the product of a substantive revision of the rule in 1966. 7C Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1903 (3d ed. 2007) (discussing the history of the rule). As amended, the rule instructs the court to undertake a practical, case-specific analysis of the intervenor's legal interest, its relationship to the litigation, and the adequacy of existing parties to represent that interest. Judicially created tests that operate as categorical exclusions—like the "gross negligence or bad faith" requirement—are inconsistent with the contextual, case-specific analysis contemplated by the rule.
Second, the origins of the gross-negligence/bad-faith standard are deeply flawed. The standard is the product of errant doctrinal creep and has no solid foundation. To see why requires some excavation, so bear with me.
The problematic doctrinal shift came in our decision in Ligas and one of the cases cited there as support for requiring a private intervenor to show that the governmental representative has been grossly negligent or acted in bad faith in the litigation. Here's the key passage:
A party seeking intervention as of right must only make a showing that the representation "may be" inadequate and "the burden of making that showing should be treated as minimal." Trbovich v. United Mine Workers of Am., 404 U.S. 528, n.10, 92 S. Ct. 630, 30 L. Ed. 2d 686 (1972). However, when the representative party is a governmental body charged by law with protecting the interests of the proposed intervenors, the representative is presumed to adequately represent their interests unless there is a showing of gross negligence or bad faith. United States v. South Bend Cmty. Sch. Corp., 692 F.2d 623, 627 (7th Cir. 1982); United States v. Bd. of Sch. Comm'rs of Indianapolis, 466 F.2d 573, 575-76 (7th Cir. 1972).
Ligas ex rel. Foster v. Maram, 478 F.3d 771, 774 (7th Cir. 2007).
Our opinion in Ligas relied on two cases for the gross-negligence/bad-faith requirement. Both arose in desegregation litigation brought by the United States against local school boards in Indiana. In the 1982 case of South Bend Community School Corp., a nonprofit parents' group sought to intervene to represent the interests of the district's students. We affirmed the denial of intervention, saying this:
[T]he students' interests were already represented by the school board. The school board is a governmental body[,] and its officers are charged by law with representing the interests of the students. Adequate representation of the  students is therefore to be presumed where, as here, there has been no showing of gross negligence or bad faith. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania v. Rizzo, 530 F.2d 501, 505 (3d Cir. 1976).
S. Bend Cmty. Sch. Corp., 692 F.2d at 627 (citation omitted).
This passage rests on a serious misreading of Rizzo, the case cited as support for the rule that a showing of gross negligence or bad faith is required in this situation. In fact, that case never uses the terms "gross negligence" or "bad faith" or anything comparable. To be sure, Rizzo recognized that "a presumption of adequate representation generally arises when the representative is a governmental body or officer charged by law with representing the interests of the absentee." 530 F.2d at 505. But the Third Circuit did not establish any fixed requirements for rebutting the presumption. Instead, the court undertook a practical, case-specific analysis as contemplated by the text of Rule 24(a)(2). Id.
The second case cited in Ligas was factually similar. In Board of School Commissioners of Indianapolis—decided a decade before the South Bend case—a parents' organization moved to intervene in desegregation litigation to represent the interests of the district's students. The district court denied intervention and we affirmed. We first concluded that the threshold requirements for intervention under Rule 24(a)(2) were satisfied: the parents and students had a cognizable interest in the subject matter of the litigation, and their interests might, as a practical matter, be impaired by the disposition of the case. Bd. of Sch. Comm'rs of Indianapolis, 466 F.2d at 575. We then moved to the question of the adequacy of the school board's representation:
We must, however, agree with the trial court's conclusion that this conceded interest was adequately represented by the school board in those portions of the case which have thus far been adjudicated. "[R]epresentation is adequate if no collusion is shown between the representative and the opposing party, if the representative does not have or represent an interest adverse to the proposed intervenor[,] and if the representative does not fail in the fulfillment of his duty." Martin v. Kalvar Corp., 411 F.2d 552, 553 (5th Cir. 1969). See also Stadin v. Union Electric Co., 309 F.2d 912, 919 (8th Cir. 1962).
There have been no allegations that the school board's interests are adverse to the appellants or that it has, at any time, acted in bad faith. Rather, as we read it, the claim is that by entering into stipulations and a consent decree [as to a certain part of the case,] the school board failed to assert appellants' interests as vigorously and effectively as appellants would have had they been parties to the litigation ... .
Bd. of Sch. Comm'rs of Indianapolis, 466 F.2d at 575 (alteration and citations omitted). We went on to hold that a mere disagreement over litigation strategy is not enough to show inadequacy of representation. Id.
Notice that the Indianapolis decision never holds that an intervenor must show gross negligence or bad faith by the governmental party as a prerequisite to intervention, as the South Bend case implied and Ligas expressly stated. Indeed, the term "gross negligence" is not found anywhere in the opinion. The term "bad faith" makes an appearance, but only in passing, and it's used in a purely descriptive manner. The decision notes that the intervenors did not allege bad faith by the school board; it never says as a prescriptive matter that a showing of bad faith is required. In short, there's no hint whatsoever that the court was promulgating a doctrinal  test for evaluating the adequacy of representation under Rule 24(a)(2) in this category of cases.
So to recap: In South Bend Community School we implied, without any support or analysis, that Rule 24(a)(2) requires a showing of gross negligence or bad faith by government counsel as a prerequisite to intervention on the side of a governmental party. In Ligas we elevated South Bend's unconsidered statement to a legal standard, again without support or analysis.
The Wright & Miller practice manual explains the origins of this doctrinal error. In a chapter discussing the adequacy-of-representation inquiry under the amended rule, the treatise says this:
In a familiar case pre-dating theamended rule[,] then-Judge Blackmun wrote that inadequacy of representation is or may be shown "by proof of collusion between the representative and an opposing party, by the representative having or representing an interest adverse to the interven[or], or by the failure of the representative in the fulfillment of his duty." [Stadin, 309 F.2d at 919.] This was a wholly accurate statement. As will be seen later, a showing of any of the circumstances listed by Judge Blackmun is enough to establish inadequacy of representation. But in several cases the statement has been turned around and it has been said:
The rule is that representation is adequate if no collusion is shown between the representative and an opposing party, if the representative does not have or represent an interest adverse to the proposed intervenor[,] and if the representative does not fail in the fulfillment of his duty. [Martin, 411 F.2d at 553.]
It is one thing to say that inadequate representation can be shown by establishing one of three circumstances. It is quite another to say that representation is adequate unless one of those three circumstances is present. If Judge Blackmun had said that representation is inadequate "only" if one of the circumstances he listed were present[,] the proposition would be reversible, but he did not say that and there is nothing in his opinion to indicate that he was endeavoring to give a comprehensive list of the circumstances that can establish inadequacy of representation. The wide variety of cases that come to the courts make it unlikely that there are three and only three circumstances that would make representation inadequate and suggest that adequacy of representation is a very complex variable.
Wright, supra, § 1909, at 392-93 (emphasis added).
In other words, the "turned around" version of Judge Blackmun's statement commits the common error of treating a sufficient condition as a necessary condition. Any of the three circumstances on Judge Blackmun's list is clearly sufficient to establish inadequate representation, but it's not necessary to establish one of the three to demonstrate inadequate representation. Other circumstances may also suffice.
If the three circumstances on the Blackmun's list sound familiar, they should. The mistaken "turned around" version is a quote from Martin, 411 F.2d at 553. That same flawed quotation from Martin appears in our 1972 Indianapolis desegregation decision, which in turn was cited in our 1982 South Bend desegregation decision, which in turn provided the support for the strict gross-negligence/bad-faith rule announced in Ligas. Our use of the inaccurate Martin quotation in the Indianapolis case is followed by a "see also" citation to Stadin where the original Blackmun statement appears. Bd. of Sch.  Comm'rs of Indianapolis, 466 F.2d at 575. But we quoted the faulty "turned around" version from Martin instead. Id. So to the extent that our circuit's "gross negligence or bad faith" requirement rests on Martin's errant, inverted version of Judge Blackmun's statement in Stadin, it is wrong for this additional reason.
Returning now to this case, the majority accepts that Ligas and the two desegregation cases are distinguishable because they involved private parties seeking to intervene on the side of a governmental party. Majority Op. at p. 9. But my colleagues apply the gross-negligence/bad-faith requirement anyway. I disagree. Those cases do not control, as the majority readily acknowledges, and because they are so flawed, I would not extend their application beyond their specific facts. Indeed, for the reasons I've just highlighted, I think the cases are ripe for correction. But we're not asked to revisit them here, so it's enough to note the flawed provenance of the gross-negligence/bad-faith requirement and confine it to cases involving intervention by private parties seeking to enter the litigation on the side of a governmental party.
All of that said, I think the basic underlying presumption is sound. As the majority explains, the default standard for evaluating the adequacy of existing representation is quite lenient. Majority Op. at p. 8. The Supreme Court has held that "[t]he requirement of the Rule is satisfied if the applicant shows that representation of his interest 'may be' inadequate; and the burden of making this showing should be treated as minimal." Trbovich v. United Mine Workers of Am., 404 U.S. 528, 538 n.10, 92 S. Ct. 630, 30 L. Ed. 2d 686 (1972). Our cases apply a presumption of adequate representation in two situations: when the intervenor and the named party share the same goal, and when the named party is a governmental official or body charged by law with protecting the intervenor's interest. WEAC, 705 F.3d at 659.
Presuming adequate representation makes sense in both situations. When the intervenor's and the named party's ultimate goals are identical, or when a governmental official or body is legally required to represent the intervenor's interest, it is reasonable, fair, and consistent with the practical inquiry required by Rule 24(a)(2) to start from a presumption of adequate representation and put the intervenor to a heightened burden to show a concrete, substantive conflict or an actual divergence of interests to overcome it. Id.; see also Solid Waste Agency of N. Cook Cnty. v. U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, 101 F.3d 503, 508 (7th Cir. 1996). Indeed, this is the general rule. See Wright, supra, § 1909, at 393-94 (collecting cases).
But the presumption "does not mean that intervention always must be denied if the interests of an absentee and one of the parties are identical or if there is a party whose function it is to represent the absentee." Id. at 426-27. Rather, "[i]t means only that there must be a concrete showing of circumstances in the particular case that make the representation inadequate." Id. at 427. I would apply the presumption of adequate representation here—not the gross-negligence/badfaith requirement, which is badly flawed for the reasons I've discussed.
Still, I agree with the decision to affirm. The Legislature hasn't identified a significant, concrete conflict or divergence in interests between it and the Attorney General. The argument for intervention of right relies on the lenient "may be inadequate" standard and rests largely on political and policy differences with the Attorney General over abortion regulations, as well as disagreements about litigation strategy in this and other cases. That's not  enough to rebut the presumption of adequate representation. It's possible that a concrete and significant conflict may arise down the road, but that showing has not been made. At this stage in the litigation, the Attorney General is adequately representing the shared goal of defending the challenged abortion regulations.
Finally, I agree with my colleagues that Judge Conley reasonably exercised his discretion in denying the Legislature's alternative request for permissive intervention under Rule 24(b)(1). I have nothing to add on that subject. Because my analysis of the Rule 24(a)(2) question differs from the majority's, I respectfully concur.

 

