, dissenting. In my view, Rutherford's notice of appeal was effective to bring up review of only one of the district court's two decisions: its denial of Rutherford's motion to reconsider, not its decision on the merits of Rutherford's motion to modify his sentence.
Under the Sentencing Reform Act, a district court is only authorized to "modify a term of imprisonment once it has been  imposed" in three limited circumstances. Just one is relevant here: "the court may modify an imposed term of imprisonment to the extent otherwise expressly permitted by statute or by Rule 35 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure." 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(1)(B). The First Step Act expressly permitted Rutherford to move for a reduced sentence and permitted the court to modify his sentence in response.
As the panel explains, the district court granted that motion in part. And Rutherford, dissatisfied with the district court's decision, moved for reconsideration of the new sentence. The majority concludes that Rutherford's motion for reconsideration qualified as a common-law motion that extended the time that Rutherford had to appeal his sentence. That would mean that his notice of appeal was timely filed for purposes of both the underlying resentencing decision and the district court's refusal to reconsider the sentence. I see things differently.
To decide whether the motion for reconsideration extended the time to file a notice of appeal, we have to determine what authorized Rutherford to make that motion. In United States v. Townsend, we held that the Sentencing Reform Act abrogated district courts' common-law authority to entertain motions to reconsider their sentencing decisions. 762 F.3d 641, 646 (7th Cir. 2014). So common-law authority cannot support Rutherford's motion for reconsideration. Under Townsend's interpretation of § 3582(c)(1)(B), Rutherford could only move for reconsideration of his sentence if a statute or Rule 35 allowed it.
The First Step Act expressly authorizes a district court to modify a sentence in keeping with the Act's removal of enhanced sentencing for some prior drug convictions. But it does not expressly authorize a motion for reconsideration of the modified sentence.1  Thus, Rutherford could seek reconsideration only through Rule 35—and a Rule 35 motion doesn't extend the time to take an appeal. Fed. R. App. P. 4(b)(5). Because Rutherford's Rule 35 motion didn't stop the clock, the deadline for appealing the sentence expired before Rutherford filed his notice of appeal. Since Rutherford's notice of appeal was untimely as to the underlying resentencing decision, we lack the authority to review the resentencing itself.
The majority disagrees because it doesn't think that Rutherford was limited to Rule 35. Relying on United States v. Ibarra, 502 U.S. 1, 112 S. Ct. 4, 116 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1991), and United States v. Rollins, 607 F.3d 500 (7th Cir. 2010), it characterizes Rutherford's motion for reconsideration as a common-law motion that tolled the time for appeal. But Townsend distinguishes Ibarra and Rollins on the ground that those cases allowed common-law reconsideration motions on issues related to convictions rather than sentences. 762 F.3d at 646. Townsend squarely holds that sentencing is different—in that context, theSentencing Reform Act overrides the common-law power that district courts otherwise possess. This is a sentencing  case, so Townsend, not Ibarra or Rollins, controls.
While we cannot review the court's resentencing decision, we do have authority to review its refusal to reconsider that decision—Rutherford's appeal of the latter decision was timely. This is cold comfort for Rutherford, though, because the appeal fails on the merits. Rule 35(a) allows a defendant to seek correction of only "arithmetical, technical, or other clear error," and Rutherford instead repeated the same arguments from his initial motion.
In sum, I think the majority is wrong to assume the authority to review Rutherford's sentence. This is a nonprecedential decision, though, so the error is not set in stone. In a future case, we should correct it.

 

