, concurring in the judgment. Administrative exhaustion under the Prison Litigation Reform Act (PLRA) is an affirmative defense, so the defendant bears the burden of showing that the plaintiff failed to exhaust. Jones v. Bock, 549 U.S. 199, 212, 127 S. Ct. 910, 166 L. Ed. 2d 798 (2007); Dole v. Chandler, 438 F.3d 804, 809 (7th Cir. 2006). At oral argument, Wexford stated that if the Administrative Review Board had denied Williams's appeal of his emergency grievance determination without comment, then Williams would have exhausted all of his available administrative remedies. That is enough to resolve this appeal, and I would reverse the district court's judgment on that ground.
I write separately because in my view, the majority's reasoning conflicts with the Supreme Court's interpretation of the PLRA.1  The majority's holding turns on the fact that the 2016 Illinois Administrative Code did not expressly say that an inmate should file a standard grievance if the prison decided that his emergency grievance did not warrant fast-track treatment. In the absence of such an explicit instruction, the majority holds, Williams's filing of the emergency grievance was enough to satisfy the PLRA's exhaustion requirement. It was reasonable for Williams to believe that he didn't have to do anything more.
 But in Ross v. Blake, the Supreme Court held that so long as additional remedies are "available" to a prisoner, "the PLRA's text suggests no limits on an inmate's obligation to exhaust." 136 S. Ct. 1850, 1856, 195 L. Ed. 2d 117 (2016). A straightforward reading of the Illinois regulations suggests that Williams had an additional avenue available to him: the standard grievance procedure. And that's true even though § 504.840 did not explicitly require him to resubmit his grievance through the standard procedure. The "availability" of the remedy doesn't turn on whether the regulations directed Williams to use it—the alternative was available so long as it remained at Williams's disposal. See Woodford v. Ngo, 548 U.S. 81, 90, 126 S. Ct. 2378, 165 L. Ed. 2d 368 (2006).
Williams does not dispute that the normal grievance procedure was "available" to him in this sense. See Ross, 136 S. Ct. at 1859 (stressing that "an inmate is required to exhaust those, but only those, grievance procedures that are 'capable of use' to obtain 'some relief for the action complained of'" (citation omitted)). For example, he does not contend that the normal grievance procedure "operate[d] as a simple dead end—with officers unable or consistently unwilling to provide any relief to aggrieved inmates." Id. Nor does he claim that the prescribed process was "so opaque that it [was], practically speaking, incapable of use." Id.; see also id. (explaining that "when a remedy is ... essentially 'unknowable'—so that no ordinary prisoner can make sense of what it demands—then it is also unavailable" (citation omitted)). Nor does he say that prison administrators misrepresented what was required of him, thereby "thwart[ing]" his efforts to file a grievance. Id. at 1860 (explaining that a remedy is unavailable when administrators "devise procedural systems" designed "to trip[] up all but the most skillful prisoners" (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). Instead, his contention, which the majority accepts, is that the silence in the prison regulations made it reasonable for him to think that he didn't have to use the standard grievance procedure.
The problem is that the Court rejected this very argument in Ross v. Blake. There, the inmate contended that he had not pursued a remedy through the usual process because he thought the investigative process in which he had participated "served as a substitute for that otherwise standard process." Id. at 1855. The Court held that such a mistake, even if reasonable, did not render the standard process exhausted. Id. at 1858. Indeed, the Court could not have been more explicit that the PLRA contains no exception for "cases in which a prisoner makes a reasonable mistake about the meaning of a prison's grievance procedures." Id.
It's true that Thornton v. Snyder contains dicta to the contrary. 428 F.3d 690, 694 (7th Cir. 2005). (Like the majority, I put our nonprecedential decisions aside.) The majority's reliance on Thornton is misplaced, though, and not only because the relevant language is dicta. Thornton preceded Ross v. Blake by more than a decade. Whatever we may have said about the issue before Ross v. Blake was decided, the Court has now given us different marching orders. And, of course, as an inferior court, we are bound to follow them.
The majority observes that recent amendments to the Illinois Code blunt the significance of this opinion. But that is only true as to Illinois—we have no information about Wisconsin and Indiana law, so the case may well matter for the other states within our jurisdiction. Regardless, if the case truly lacks long-term impact, it would  have been better for us to resolve it on the basis of Wexford's concession. Because I think the majority's resolution conflicts with Ross v. Blake, I concur in the judgment only.

 

