
I agree with the majority about legislative immunity in this case. It is not available, so the individual capacity claim should go forward. I respectfully disagree, however, with the majority's conclusion that any official capacity claim exists to go forward. The complaint seeks declarative and injunctive relief against Clemons; specifically, it targets Clemons's actions on his social media accounts. Though the complaint states that its claims are against Clemons in his official as well as his individual capacity, that label is not enough. Painting stripes on a horse doesn't turn it into a zebra, and no matter how the plaintiff names his claims, they still are what they are. Because the complaint targets Clemons not as a proxy for the sovereign, but for personal conduct that will not be repeated by his successor-in-office, the suit involves only an individual capacity claim—and it is for that reason that Clemons may not invoke sovereign immunity.
I begin by noting why we need to parse out whether the plaintiff has brought both an official capacity and an individual capacity claim at this stage. The Supreme Court has, in the posture of reviewing a motion to dismiss, instructed that "courts should look to whether the sovereign is the real party in interest to determine whether sovereign immunity bars the suit." Lewis v. Clarke, 137 S. Ct. 1285, 1290, 197 L. Ed. 2d 631 (2017). It makes sense that the Supreme Court has treated this question as a threshold inquiry: if the state employee is sued in his official capacity, then the action "is in essence against a State even if the State is not a named party," and the state is ordinarily "entitled to invoke the Eleventh Amendment's protection." Id. But if the sovereign would not be affected by the suit, there is no need to consider whether Ex parte Young would allow the suit to go forward. After all, under Ex parte Young, a "suit alleging a violation of the federal constitution against a state official in his official capacity for injunctive relief on a prospective basis is not a suit against the state, and, accordingly, does not violate the Eleventh Amendment." Grizzle v. Kemp, 634 F.3d 1314, 1319 (11th Cir. 2011). And that rule can only come into play after deciding whether or not a suit is in fact brought against a state official in his official, rather than only individual, capacity.
This inquiry, moreover, does not involve any factual determinations or credibility judgments; it is directed at the legal nature of the complaint's allegations, not at the factual truth of any of those allegations. That is yet another reason this issue—whether the complaint alleges a claim that is "in essence" against the sovereign—is a threshold question that we should seek to answer before considering any exception to sovereign immunity. And as the Supreme Court has recognized, "a question of immunity is separate from the merits of the underlying action for purposes of the Cohen test even though a reviewing court must consider the plaintiff's factual allegations in resolving the immunity issue." Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 528-29, 105 S. Ct. 2806, 86 L. Ed. 2d 411 (1985).
Guiding our assessment, the Supreme Court directs that we "may not simply rely on the characterization of the parties in the complaint, but rather must determine in the first instance whether the remedy sought is truly against the sovereign." Lewis, 137 S. Ct. at 1290.1  We ourselves have explained that a complaint caption indicating an official capacity claim "is—in and of itself—of little significance." Lundgren v. McDaniel, 814 F.2d 600, 604 (11th Cir. 1987). The "complaint itself, not the caption, controls the identification of the parties and the capacity in which they are sued." Welch v. Laney, 57 F.3d 1004, 1010 (11th Cir. 1995).
And the capacity in which someone is sued makes a real difference. A suit "against a state official in his or her official capacity is not a suit against the official but rather is a suit against the official's office." Will v. Michigan Dep't of State Police, 491 U.S. 58, 71, 109 S. Ct. 2304, 105 L. Ed. 2d 45 (1989). Official capacity suits "generally represent only another way of pleading an action against an entity of which an officer is an agent." Yeldell v. Cooper Green Hosp., Inc., 956 F.2d 1056, 1060 (11th Cir. 1992) (quoting Kentucky v. Graham, 473 U.S. 159, 165-66, 105 S. Ct. 3099, 87 L. Ed. 2d 114 (1985)). So in "an official-capacity claim, the relief sought is only nominally against the official and in fact is against the official's office and thus the sovereign itself." Lewis, 137 S. Ct. at 1291. That means an official capacity suit targets not the personal behavior of an official like Clemons, but his enforcement of, or action carrying out, a government policy. And the result of such a suit, if successful, is that both the current officeholder and any future officeholder will be barred from carrying out whatever policy is at issue.
By contrast, individual capacity suits "seek to impose personal liability upon a government official for actions he takes under color of state law." Yeldell, 956 F.2d at 1060 (quoting Graham, 473 U.S. at 165-66). And "to establish personal liability in a § 1983 action, it is enough to show that the official, acting under color of state law, caused the deprivation of a federal right." Id. (quoting Graham, 473 U.S. at 166 (emphasis in original)). The "plaintiff in a personal-capacity suit need not establish a connection to governmental 'policy or custom.'" Hafer v. Melo, 502 U.S. 21, 25, 112 S. Ct. 358, 116 L. Ed. 2d 301 (1991) (quoting Graham, 473 U.S. at 166-67). That means an individual capacity suit targets the individual behavior of an official like Clemons as he carries out his state duties. And a successful suit may result in an award of monetary damages, declarative relief, or injunctive relief to correct the constitutional violation.
I pause here to note a source of understandable confusion. Both individual capacity and official capacity claims brought under § 1983 require action "under color of state law"—meaning that both types of claims necessarily arise out of conduct that is connected in some way to the state employee's authority as a government official. But the mere fact that a state employee was acting under color of state law does not mean that a claim against that employee targets him in his official capacity. That is true even though—again, confusingly—the phrase "acted in an official capacity" is often used interchangeably with "acted under color of state law." So the term "official capacity" can mean one thing when describing the capacity in which an official acted, and another when describing the capacity in which the official is sued. See Hafer, 502 U.S. at 26.
That is a crucial distinction, but it is one that the majority opinion (like the district court opinion below) appears to elide. See Maj. Op. at 6-7 (stating that plaintiff's allegations "indicate that Representative Clemons is acting in his official capacity when he operates these social media accounts as an extension of his role in state office"). A "defendant acts under color of state law when she deprives the plaintiff of a right through the exercise of authority that she has by virtue of her government office or position." Butler v. Sheriff of Palm Beach Cty., 685 F.3d 1261, 1265 (11th Cir. 2012). "The dispositive question" in the color-of-state-law inquiry "is whether the defendant was exercising the power she possessed based on state authority or was acting only as a private individual." Id. But the "official" nature of a defendant's acts—which may resolve the under-color-of-state-law inquiry—does not determine whether a particular claim is against a defendant in his official capacity. Instead, we must analyze the complaint to determine whether the requested relief operates against the office the individual holds—or rather, against the individual himself.
Hafer v. Melo provides a useful guide. See 502 U.S. at 22-23. There, the newly elected auditor general of Pennsylvania fired eighteen employees shortly after assuming her position. Id. at 23. Several terminated employees alleged that Hafer fired them because of their political affiliation and filed suit seeking damages from her personally. Id. Hafer argued that because the suit concerned an official action—her decision to fire the employees—the suit must be against her in her official capacity. Id. at 26. It was in her interest to characterize the claim that way because an official capacity action for damages would have been barred. See Will, 491 U.S. at 71 ("[N]either a State nor its officials acting in their official capacities are 'persons' under § 1983."). But the Supreme Court permitted the individual suit against Hafer to go forward, explaining that "the phrase 'acting in their official capacities' is best understood as a reference to the capacity in which the state officer is sued, not the capacity in which the officer inflicts the alleged injury." Hafer, 502 U.S. at 26 (quoting Will, 491 U.S. at 71).
So the question of whether a government employee acted under color of state law is not a replacement for the question of whether the claim is targeted at the employee in an official capacity or in an individual capacity; action under color of state law is a requirement for either type of § 1983 claim.2  Only if the defendant acted under color of state law and the complaint seeks relief against the sovereign do we need to consider exceptions to sovereign immunity. No sovereign means no sovereign immunity, and no sovereign immunity means no exceptions to sovereign immunity.
These first pages have admittedly been a lengthy wind-up; the doctrine distinguishing official capacity and individual capacity claims is complicated. But applying that doctrinal framework in this case leads to the conclusion that Clemons is targeted only in his individual capacity, not in his official capacity. The complaint shows that Clemons acted with authority connected to his position as a state representative when he operated his social media accounts and blocked the plaintiff from those accounts—this was, as the majority opinion notes, an "extension of his role in state office." Maj. Op. at 7. Because a "person acts under color of state law when he acts with authority possessed by virtue of his employment with the state," Clemons was acting under color of state law for purposes of the individual capacity § 1983 claim. Almand v. DeKalb Cty., 103 F.3d 1510, 1513 (11th Cir. 1997).
But that does not mean the plaintiff's complaint targets Clemons as a proxy for the sovereign. The complaint seeks no relief from the office that Clemons holds, alleges no Florida House of Representatives policy or custom regarding representatives' social media accounts, and requests no remedy that will in any way operate against the Florida House of Representatives or any other state entity.
The only relief that the complaint seeks is a declaration and "an injunction requiring" Clemons to "unblock" the plaintiff from his "official Twitter and Facebook accounts" and prohibiting Clemons from "blocking Plaintiff or others from the @ChuckClemons21 Twitter and Facebook accounts on the basis of viewpoint in the future." Crucially, if Clemons were to leave office, it would make no sense to have his successor-in-office automatically assume his role in the litigation. The account at issue belongs to Clemons; it is not an account for whatever person happens to currently hold that office. If Clemons were no longer a legislator, there is no reason to believe that Attwood would have any further interest in regaining access to Clemons's Twitter and Facebook accounts—and his successor-in-office would have no ability to manage those accounts in any event.
Even if Attwood succeeds, then, ordering his requested relief "will not require action by the sovereign or disturb the sovereign's property"—showing that this "is not a suit against [Clemons] in his official capacity." See Lewis, 137 S. Ct. at 1291 (citation omitted). Indeed, the only way we know that the complaint attempts to make an official capacity claim is that it says so in a single conclusory paragraph, and as we know from Lundgren, that is not enough. See 814 F.2d at 604; see also Lewis, 137 S. Ct. at 1290. Without more, the complaint does not contain an official capacity claim—and there is no need to consider whether Ex parte Young would nonetheless allow such a claim to go forward.
Davison v. Randall—cited approvingly in the majority opinion—shows why this is the right way to analyze these questions in this type of case. See Maj. Op. at 7 (citing Davison, 912 F.3d 666, 680 (4th Cir. 2019)). In Davison, the Fourth Circuit's opinion addressed a similar action against a government official (there, the chair of a county board of supervisors) for blocking a constituent from a social media account. In that case, as in this one, the plaintiff sued the government employee in both her individual and official capacities. 912 F.3d at 676. The Fourth Circuit affirmed a declaratory judgment against the government employee on the § 1983 individual capacity claim, explaining that the chair of a county board acted "under color of state law" because she "created and administered the Chair's Facebook Page to further her duties as a municipal official" and used the Facebook page "as a tool of governance." Id. at 680 (citation omitted). The court also concluded that the Chair "engaged in unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination" when she banned a constituent from her County Chair Facebook page. Id. at 688.
But the Fourth Circuit then affirmed the district court's dismissal of the official capacity claim against the Chair. Compare Maj. Op. at 7 (describing Davison as holding "that government officials can act in their official capacities when blocking persons from certain social media accounts related to their offices"), with Davison, 912 F.3d at 690 (affirming the district court for "rejecting Davison's official capacity claim"). The court explained that while individual capacity suits "seek to impose personal liability upon a government official for actions" taken under color of state law, official capacity suits are treated as actions against the government entity itself. Id. at 688 (quoting Graham, 473 U.S. at 165). Because no policy or custom of the county board of supervisors played a role in the Chair's decision to block the constituent from her Facebook page, there was no official capacity claim; the claim was against the person, not the government. Id. at 689-90. Davison recognizes, then, that determining whether an official acted under color of state law does not answer the question of whether a plaintiff properly brought an official capacity claim.
While the complaint in this case plausibly alleges that Clemons acted under color of state law, I do not see how it alleges any claim against Clemons in his official capacity. For that reason, we may deny Clemons's invocation of sovereign immunity without considering Ex parte Young.
* * *
The intersection of politics, government, and social media has generated an increasing number of cases, and I trust that more are on the horizon. It is thus crucial that we analyze these claims with precision. Here, I would conclude that the plaintiff has sued Clemons in his individual capacity only. Because his complaint does not actually raise an official capacity claim against Clemons as a proxy for the sovereign, only the individual capacity claim should survive. I respectfully concur in the denial of legislative immunity, and otherwise find that no official capacity claim was presented for which sovereign immunity could be considered.

 

