
Because Blanc has not demonstrated a strong likelihood of success on the merits of his petition, his motion for stay of removal should be denied. See Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434, 129 S. Ct. 1749, 173 L. Ed. 2d 550 (2009).
Blanc complains that the Immigration Judge failed to advise him that he could apply for preconclusion voluntary departure. Based on the available hearing transcripts, it appears that this is so. But when Blanc raised the issue on appeal to the Board of Immigration Appeals, the BIA made its own decision that preconclusion voluntary departure was not warranted as a matter of discretion—regardless of whether Blanc was statutorily eligible for that privilege. Because the BIA made a discretionary decision to deny voluntary departure, (1) we lack jurisdiction to review that decision, and (2) even if our jurisdiction to review the IJ's arguable legal error somehow survived the BIA's independent exercise of discretion, the BIA's decision rendered any error by the IJ harmless.
In its order, the BIA first addressed the IJ's denial of Blanc's motion for postconclusion voluntary departure under 8 U.S.C. § 1229c(b), discussing the IJ's weighing of the equities and concluding that "we do not find that the Immigration Judge exceeded his authority in determining that the respondent did not merit a favorable exercise of discretion for cancellation of removal and voluntary departure." The BIA then separately—and explicitly—addressed the question of preconclusion voluntary departure, as follows: "The respondent argues throughout his brief that the Immigration Judge should have advised him of his right to pre-conclusion voluntary departure. Voluntary departure is a discretionary form of relief, whether pre-conclusion or post-conclusion voluntary departure. Since the respondent did not demonstrate that he warranted a discretionary grant of voluntary departure, it was immaterial that the Immigration Judge did not inform him of the potential availability of pre-conclusion voluntary departure." In other words, because the BIA found that discretionary relief was not warranted, the IJ's failure to inform Blanc of the availability of such relief was harmless.
As the BIA noted, voluntary departure is "a form of discretionary relief." Dada v. Mukasey, 554 U.S. 1, 4, 128 S. Ct. 2307, 171 L. Ed. 2d 178 (2008). It is within the BIA's power to decide matters of discretion de novo on appeal: "The Board may review questions of law, discretion, and judgment and all other issues in appeals from decisions of immigration judges de novo." 8 C.F.R. § 1003.1(d)(3)(ii). And we lack jurisdiction to review the BIA's denial of discretionary relief, except to the extent that the petitioner raises constitutional claims or questions of law. 8 U.S.C. §§ 1252(a)(2)(B) & (a)(2)(D); Bing Quan Lin v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 881 F.3d 860, 871 (11th Cir. 2018). In the context of voluntary departure, this means that we retain jurisdiction to review the BIA's "non-discretionary legal determinations as to statutory eligibility," but not its purely "discretionary decision denying voluntary departure." Alvarado v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 610 F.3d 1311, 1314 (11th Cir. 2010). The BIA's decision that preconclusion voluntary departure was not warranted in Blanc's case was made as a matter of discretion, not based on Blanc's statutory eligibility for that relief.
The majority likely sees the IJ's failure to inform Blanc about his potential eligibility for preconclusion voluntary departure as a legal error sufficient to invoke our jurisdiction. But when "the BIA issues its own decision, we review only that decision, except to the extent the BIA expressly adopts the IJ's opinion or reasoning." Lopez v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 914 F.3d 1292, 1297 (11th Cir. 2019). So by making its own decision that discretionary relief was not warranted, the BIA effectively intervened to cut off our jurisdiction. At the very least, the BIA's independent decision made the IJ's failure to inform Blanc about the availability of preconclusion voluntary departure irrelevant and rendered any legal error in that failure harmless. Either way, Blanc cannot succeed on the merits of his petition for review, and granting a stay of removal simply to delay the inevitable runs contrary to the standard that is supposed to govern the exercise of our discretion in such cases. See Nken, 556 U.S. at 434. I respectfully dissent.

 

