, concurring in part and dissenting in part:
I join the majority in holding that Champions should receive a deduction for donating its easement for conservation purposes. See I.R.C. § 170(h)(1)(C). The easement preserves an "open space" for the public's "scenic enjoyment," and "will yield a significant public benefit." Id. § 170(h)(4)(A)(iii). Two publicly accessible rivers cut through and around the easement—providing views of the grassy golf course, trees, and shrubbery that are far more scenic than views of the developed properties downstream. But I must part ways with the majority's decision to reach an issue not argued below and with its separate conclusion that the easement is necessarily a "relatively natural habitat." Id. § 170(h)(4)(A)(ii).
First, I would not reach Champions' new argument that the governing statute and regulation conflict. "As a general rule, a taxpayer may not address an issue on appeal which it has not first presented to the Tax Court." Grant v. Comm'r, 103 F.3d 948, 952 (11th Cir. 1996). To be sure, our cases have also "identified certain exceptional circumstances" where it might be appropriate to use our discretion and "deviate from this rule of practice." Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc. v. Fernandez, 741 F.2d 355, 360 (11th Cir. 1984). Yet the majority opinion leapfrogs any consideration of our normal rule or its exceptions; instead, the opinion gets right to the merits of an argument first raised on appeal. Doing so signals that we are not terribly committed to the requirement that parties raise arguments below. That message gets amplified by the fact that we have no compelling reason to decide Champions' new argument: the opinion already hands Champions the win. We should not use our discretion to deviate from ordinary practice here.
Second, in my view, Champions' easement might not be a "relatively natural habitat." I.R.C. § 170(h)(4)(A)(ii). The man-made golf course takes up more than 80 percent of the easement. In making the course, Champions used non-native grasses, one of which requires the use of large fans to keep it cool in the hot Georgia sun. And to maintain the course, Champions pumps anywhere from 70,000 to 600,000  gallons of water a day out of the Little River.
Champions also coats its golf course with chemicals—including fungicide, herbicide, insecticide, algaecide, and fertilizer. To apply these potent chemicals, Champions' staff members sometimes need gloves and respirators. The chemicals not only artificially change the habitat, but do so in ways that pose what the tax court called "environmental hazards." In fact, Champions designed the golf course to drain into nearby ponds, creeks, and otherwise undisturbed wetlands. The golf course drains toward the knotweed (a rare plant that Champions says is protected by the easement), and as the majority itself recognizes, "the knotweed thus may suffer harm from the chemicals used on the course." Maj. Op. at 14. Although the majority finds comfort in Champions' pledge to follow the golf industry's best environmental practices, we have little information about what those practices are, or how they stack up to other standards. And those standards, whatever they are, hardly define the boundary between easements that can and cannot qualify for a deduction under federal law.
Ultimately, the majority is willing to look past the easement's unnatural features because of the birds and squirrels living there. The argument has some force, especially because it does appear that the tax court overlooked evidence about the prevalence of these species. But the presence of animals cannot hide that a lot of the easement is highly developed and at least somewhat hazardous to certain species. And no matter how many animals live on the Champions easement, the reality remains the same: with the chemicals, imported grasses, large fans, artificial drainage, and water pumping, it is not at all clear that the easement amounts to a "relatively natural habitat." I do not mean to say that a golf course could never qualify; it's simply not clear that this one does.
As thorny as this "natural habitat" question is, we could spare ourselves the trouble of solving it. After all, we could limit our decision to holding that the easement qualifies for a deduction as an open, scenic space. That is the course I would take. I therefore concur in part and respectfully dissent in part.

 

