, concurring in part and dissenting in part:
I agree that Sergeant Vertin has qualified immunity for his detention of Teresa Hooks. I also agree that the plaintiff has not met the "extremely rigorous" standard for holding Sheriff Harrell liable for the actions of his subordinates on any of the claims. Piazza v. Jefferson Cty., 923 F.3d 947, 957 (11th Cir. 2019) (citation omitted). But I disagree with the majority's ruling denying qualified immunity to Sergeant Brewer for his search warrant application. According to the majority, the search warrant here was not valid—indeed, was not even arguably valid—even though the warrant (1) was based on the testimony of a witness who voluntarily admitted to serious crimes in order to talk to police; (2) explained that the witness rifled through the cab of a pickup truck parked next to a house; (3) relayed that the witness found a large amount of methamphetamine and digital scales; (4) stated that the witness grabbed those items and stole another car along with two guns from the same property; (5) reported that the house belonged to a man who had previously been named as a drug dealer by an informant; (6) was prepared by an officer who checked with an assistant district attorney to confirm that his affidavit would establish probable cause for a search of the car owner's house; and (7) was approved by a magistrate judge. That cannot be the rule. Because of that disagreement, I respectfully concur in part and dissent in part.
* * *
By the time he heard Rodney Garrett's unsolicited car-theft confession, Laurens County Sheriff's Office narcotics unit supervisor Christopher Brewer had heard from several sources over the years that David Hooks was trafficking in methamphetamine. One of those sources was a meth dealer named Jeff Frazier. In an interview with narcotics officers in 2009, Frazier described Hooks as a smart, careful drug dealer who was jealous of his territory and a dangerous guy to cross. According to Frazier, Hooks dealt mostly in cocaine but also did some business in methamphetamine. Frazier said that he personally delivered over 100 grams of meth to Hooks about once a month.
Sgt. Brewer hoped that Frazier's information might be the lead he needed to get something solid on Hooks. He drove out to Hooks's house in an unsuccessful effort to make contact with him, and he and other narcotics officers lingered in the area from time to time hoping to see something suspicious or make an informative traffic stop. But they were never able to corroborate Frazier's information—until Garrett came along.
In the late summer of 2014, Sergeant Brewer learned that Garrett had turned himself in to Sergeant Brian Brooks, who was a family friend of the Garretts and who had known Rodney Garrett since he was a child. Garrett was addicted to methamphetamine and had turned to stealing to support his habit. He confessed to Sgt. Brooks that he had stolen a luxury SUV, two guns, and a "large amount of meth" from David Hooks's property.
Garrett said that he had been kicked out of the house where he had been staying and wandered onto the Hooks property looking for something to steal, stopping now and then to smoke meth along his way. At the end of a half-mile driveway, he saw two vehicles parked under the carport next to the house, a shed about 50 yards from the house, and a Lincoln Aviator, conveniently parked in the dark near the shed. The keys were in all three vehicles.
Garrett took two long guns from the shed and got into the Aviator. He saw that the Aviator was low on gas, so he rifled through the cab of Hooks's pickup truck, looking for gas money. He found some loose bills in the center console, as well as a neoprene bag shaped like a beer bottle. The bag felt like it might contain paper money, so Garrett grabbed it, along with a set of digital scales that he found in the console under the bag, and took off in the Aviator.
When Garrett got to a gas station and opened the bag, he was startled to find that it was full of meth—about three or four thousand dollars' worth, he thought. The rest of that night, and the next, Garrett hid out in the woods smoking some of the meth and trying to decide what to do. His mind raced—he was certain that only a big-time drug dealer would have that much meth lying around in his car. He considered selling the rest of it and getting out of town, but the only person he could think of who might buy it was his own drug source, and he couldn't trust that person to keep quiet. He saw no easy way out.
Finally, Garrett decided that his best course was to turn himself in and hand the drugs over to the police. He knew that between another vehicle theft a few days earlier and the theft of the Aviator and guns from the Hooks property he would get a stiff prison sentence. But he feared the big-time drug dealer whose property he had stumbled upon, and he hoped that the police could protect him. So he went home, and his mother called Sgt. Brooks, who was a family friend. His confession followed.
When Sgt. Brewer heard Garrett's story, it added up. Sgt. Brewer was familiar with David Hooks's house from the Frazier investigation, so he recognized the Hooks property from Garrett's description of the location and layout of the house, carport, and shed. What's more, he knew that the guns and the Aviator had been stolen from Hooks just as Garrett claimed, because Hooks had reported the theft and provided a description of the guns and the VIN for the Aviator. Sgt. Brewer had reason to believe Garrett when he said that the methamphetamine came from Hooks's other car, based on past reports of Hooks's drug trafficking from Frazier and others. And to top it off, he had a meth addict who had been stealing to feed his habit but was willing to give up nearly a month's supply of the drug and go to jail out of fear for his safety.
Sgt. Brewer thought that he had enough to get a warrant to search Hooks's house. But just to be sure, he called an assistant district attorney and asked his opinion. The attorney thought that if Sgt. Brewer put Garrett's tip and all the corroborating information that he had in a search warrant application, it would be enough to find probable cause for the search. So Sgt. Brewer prepared an affidavit relating Garrett's story and added some of the reasons that he found Garrett's story believable.
Given these facts, I have no doubt that "reasonable officers in the same circumstances and possessing the same knowledge" as Sgt. Brewer "could have believed that probable cause existed." Lowe v. Aldridge, 958 F.2d 1565, 1570 (11th Cir. 1992) (citation omitted). And surely it was at least arguably enough for the magistrate to make the "practical, common-sense judgment" that there was a "fair probability" of finding contraband or other evidence of criminal activity in David Hooks's house. Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238, 244, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 76 L. Ed. 2d 527 (1983). That being so, the majority ought to have concluded that Sgt. Brewer is entitled to immunity from suit on any claim arising from his warrant application. Lowe, 958 F.2d at 1570. Instead, while paying lip service to the correct analytical framework, the majority begins its analysis with a clear factual error, continues by making too much of an irrelevant statement, and concludes by measuring its improperly truncated "new affidavit" against an artificially high legal standard.
The majority's first mistake is one of fact—Frazier did say that David Hooks was distributing methamphetamine, though not in so many words. The majority wrongly declares that "Frazier never said as much," based on the deposition testimony of Corporal Tim Burris, who interviewed Frazier in 2009 and contemporaneously reported the content of the interviews to Sgt. Brewer. It's true that Cpl. Burris testified in 2016 that he did not recall Frazier saying that David Hooks sold meth to "any third party."
The good news is that we are not forced to rely on Cpl. Burris's memory of the Frazier interviews—the record contains an audio recording that we can rely on instead. And in that recorded interview, Frazier referred to both Hooks's "meth business" and his "coke business." He also said that Hooks was angry because a nearby drug dealer was "moving a lot of dope" and "taking some of his business obviously." And if that is not enough to show that Frazier revealed Hooks to be a drug dealer, Frazier also told Cpl. Burris that he was delivering about a quarter pound of methamphetamine (roughly 113 grams) to Hooks every month. That's a lot of meth—so much that no one would seriously suggest that it could be for personal use.
Moreover, the inference that Hooks was redistributing the methamphetamine that he got from Frazier was not just a matter of common sense. In Georgia, as Sgt. Brewer was no doubt aware, anyone who possesses 28 grams or more of methamphetamine is guilty of trafficking—a more serious offense even than possession with intent to distribute. See O.C.G.A. § 16-13-31(e); United States v. Madera-Madera, 333 F.3d 1228, 1231-32 (11th Cir. 2003). So while Sgt. Brewer's statement in the warrant affidavit that Frazier said "that he had been the source of supply for multiple ounces of methamphetamine to Hooks which Hooks was redistributing" was a rough summary of Sgt. Brewer's take-away from the interviews rather than a direct quote, it was certainly "'truthful' in the sense that the information put forth is believed or appropriately accepted by the affiant as true." Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 165, 98 S. Ct. 2674, 57 L. Ed. 2d 667 (1978). The majority's decision to discard Frazier's information in its probable cause analysis was wrong.
The majority also finds fault with Sgt. Brewer's affidavit statement that Garrett had confessed to "other criminal offenses" not related to the Hooks theft and "provided other information which led to the recovery of stolen property which law enforcement was unaware of prior to this confession." Yes, that statement was partially false—though Garrett had confessed to stealing another car and buying a stolen chainsaw, police learned of both of those thefts before talking to Garrett. But even if this partial misstatement was intentional or reckless (and it's not at all clear that it was either), it was not material to the analysis because probable cause would not "be negated if the offending statement was removed." Paez v. Mulvey, 915 F.3d 1276, 1287 (11th Cir. 2019). Considering all the other information in Sgt. Brewer's affidavit, whether Garrett also confessed to previous petty crimes just didn't matter. See O'Ferrell v. United States, 253 F.3d 1257, 1267 (11th Cir. 2001).
To put an even finer point on it, even if we were to make all the changes to the warrant that the majority suggests, the "new" search warrant affidavit would still establish (at least) arguable probable cause to search Hooks's home. See Paez, 915 F.3d at 1288. To begin, the majority seriously undervalues the information provided by Garrett, which formed the heart of Sgt. Brewer's probable cause showing. If believed, Garrett's claim that he had discovered digital scales and a significant amount of methamphetamine in David Hooks's car—while the car was parked a few feet from Hooks's back door, in the middle of the night in rural Laurens County—was enough to "supply the authorizing magistrate with a reasonable basis for concluding that [he] might keep evidence of his crimes at his home, i.e., a 'safe yet accessible place.'" United States v. Kapordelis, 569 F.3d 1291, 1310 (11th Cir. 2009) (citation omitted).
The majority complains that Sgt. Brewer lacked direct evidence that Hooks kept methamphetamine in his home. But as we have said before, there "need not be an allegation that the illegal activity occurred at the location to be searched, for example the home," as long as the affidavit establishes "a connection between the defendant and the residence to be searched and a link between the residence and any criminal activity." Id. (citation omitted). Sgt. Brewer made both connections here.
The affidavit explained that Sgt. Brewer was "familiar with" Hooks and his home from a prior investigation, meaning that he had personally driven to the Hooks home and was able to confirm that the house Garrett described belonged to David Hooks—thus establishing "a connection between the defendant and the residence to be searched." Id. And evidence that Hooks had 20 grams of methamphetamine—not an amount suitable for personal use—stashed right outside his house was enough to provide the required link to the house. See United States v. Anton, 546 F.3d 1355, 1358 (11th Cir. 2008) (evidence that a suspect possesses contraband of a type that he would normally be expected to hide in his home supports a finding of probable cause to search the home). "The justification for allowing a search of a person's residence when that person is suspected of criminal activity is the common-sense realization that one tends to conceal fruits and instrumentalities of a crime in a place to which easy access may be had and in which privacy is nevertheless maintained." Kapordelis, 569 F.3d at 1310 (citation omitted). The fact that Hooks had scales and a bag full of methamphetamine in his car raised a "fair probability" that he had drugs and related paraphernalia in his house too. Gates, 462 U.S. at 238.
The affidavit also contained enough information supporting Sgt. Brewer's belief in the truth of Garrett's statement about where he found the methamphetamine. Because the affidavit relied on hearsay from an informant, Sgt. Brewer was required to provide information from which the magistrate could evaluate the informant's credibility, including his "veracity" and "basis of knowledge." Gates, 462 U.S. at 230. This does not mean that Sgt. Brewer was required to vouch for Garrett's good character; Garrett, like many police informants, was hardly a model citizen, and Sgt. Brewer did not try to cast him in that light in his affidavit. Where an informant's background and character are questionable or unknown, his "veracity" can be established by showing that "corroboration through other sources of information reduced the chances of a reckless or prevaricating tale," and provided "a substantial basis for crediting the hearsay." Id. at 244-45 (citation omitted). And the informant's veracity and basis of knowledge are "closely intertwined issues that may usefully illuminate the commonsense, practical question whether there is 'probable cause' to believe that contraband or evidence is located in a particular place." Id. at 230.
Sgt. Brewer's affidavit described three circumstances supporting the reliability of Garrett's information. First, in explaining how he got the methamphetamine, Garrett voluntarily confessed to stealing the Aviator and two guns, as well as the drugs and digital scales, from David Hooks's property. The fact that Garrett was willing to risk significant criminal exposure (he was later sentenced to 10 years with 5 to serve in prison) tended to make his account of where he found the methamphetamine more believable. Although the fact that an informant's statement is against his penal interests is not enough to establish probable cause standing alone, admissions "of crime, like admissions against proprietary interests, carry their own indicia of credibility" and provide at least some support for a finding of probable cause. United States v. Harris, 403 U.S. 573, 583, 91 S. Ct. 2075, 29 L. Ed. 2d 723 (1971) (plurality opinion); see United States v. Burston, 159 F.3d 1328, 1334 (11th Cir. 1998).
Garrett also confessed that he often smoked a gram of meth a day, that he had been smoking meth on the night of the thefts, and that he was looking for something to steal in order to support his habit when he entered Hooks's property. This confession, besides being yet another statement against Garrett's penal interests, gave Sgt. Brewer an additional reason to believe that Garrett had stumbled on the drug stash as he said. After all, where would Garrett have gotten the money to buy 20 grams of methamphetamine? And if he had traded stolen goods for the drugs after leaving the Hooks property, as the district court suggested, why would he have turned it over to law enforcement, rather than keeping it for his own use? In this context, Garrett's explanation—that he was alarmed by the amount of meth that he found and afraid for his safety once the owner discovered its theft—made sense. See Massachusetts v. Upton, 466 U.S. 727, 734, 104 S. Ct. 2085, 80 L. Ed. 2d 721 (1984) ("internal coherence" of informant's story supported finding of probable cause).
Second, the fact that Garrett's knowledge was based on his personal observation supported the reliability of his information. See United States v. Brundidge, 170 F.3d 1350, 1353 (11th Cir. 1999). Garrett claimed to have found the methamphetamine in David Hooks's car himself—and he had proof of his firsthand experience, because he still had the drugs, along with the Aviator and guns that he admitted to stealing at the same time. It would have been a different matter if Garrett claimed that he had stolen a car and some drugs from Hooks but could not produce either one.
Third, Sgt. Brewer provided information from a previous informant (Frazier) who had also claimed that David Hooks was involved with methamphetamine. To be sure, Frazier's information was stale and had not been corroborated before. But otherwise-uncorroborated allegations made by two informants in separate statements can corroborate each other. See United States v. Martin, 615 F.2d 318, 326 (5th Cir. 1980).1  And stale information connecting a suspect with drug trafficking in the past can provide support for allegations of more recent drug activity. See United States v. Magluta, 198 F.3d 1265, 1272 (11th Cir. 1999), vacated in part on other grounds on reh'g 203 F.3d 1304, 1305 (11th Cir. 2000); United States v. Harris, 20 F.3d 445, 450 (11th Cir. 1994).
With all of this information corroborating Garrett's claim that he found 20 grams of methamphetamine in Hooks's car, Sgt. Brewer had plenty of facts to support the magistrate's finding of probable cause—more than he needed to preserve his qualified immunity from the plaintiff's civil claims. To deny qualified immunity, we must conclude not only that the revised affidavit does not support a finding of probable cause, but also that "a reasonably well-trained officer" in the appellant's "position would have known that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause and that he should not have applied for the warrant." Malley v. Briggs, 475 U.S. 335, 345, 106 S. Ct. 1092, 89 L. Ed. 2d 271 (1986). And "if officers of reasonable competence could disagree on this issue, immunity should be recognized." Id. at 341. Sgt. Brewer had at least arguable probable cause to obtain the search warrant, and he should not be held personally liable for any damages arising from the execution of the warrant.
* * *
If this search warrant application doesn't satisfy the "arguable probable cause" standard, I almost don't know what would. I therefore respectfully dissent to the majority's decision on the warrant, and join the remainder of the majority opinion.

 

