
I agree with both of the Court's principal conclusions. First, Medley's FCCPA claims should proceed because her Agreement with DISH was "deemed rejected" under 11 U.S.C. § 365(d)(1), meaning that she did not accrue new debt on the Agreement after bankruptcy. Second, Medley's TCPA claim fails because she could not unilaterally revoke the written Agreement's consent provision. I write separately to note that the Agreement's rejection (and the debt's discharge) may affect DISH's ability to contact Medley apart from her ability to withdraw consent. In short, although the Agreement's rejection did not nullify the consent provision, the subsequent discharge of Medley's debt may have taken DISH's actions outside the provision's scope.
At first blush, the consent provision's continuing ability to shield DISH from TCPA liability seems counterintuitive; the provision, after all, is part of a contract that was rejected in bankruptcy. But as the Court's opinion notes, rejection "does not dissolve or nullify the contract." Maj. Op. at 9 (citing Thompkins v. Lil' Joe Records, Inc., 476 F.3d 1294, 1306-07 (11th Cir. 2007)). Rather, the Bankruptcy Code tells us that "the rejection of an executory contract . . . constitutes a breach of such contract." 11 U.S.C. § 365(g).
Because debtors typically emerge from Chapter 7 bankruptcies with a fresh start, it is tempting to think of rejection as a process by which the debtor is entirely relieved of her contractual obligations. It is important, though, to distinguish between rejection and discharge. Rejection is about whether the estate, as opposed to the debtor, will undertake the obligations of an executory contract. But rejection does not free the debtor of any obligation. Rather, it "merely frees the estate from the obligation to perform." Maj. Op. at 10 (quoting Thompkins, 476 F.3d at 1306) (emphasis added); see also Michael T. Andrew, Executory Contracts in Bankruptcy: Understanding "Rejection," 59 U. Colo. L. Rev. 845, 848 (1988). So the financial obligation is no more, but the debtor may retain other obligations or agreements depending on what else is contained in the rejected contract.
Here, when the Chapter 7 trustee failed to assume the Agreement within 60 days, it was rejected by operation of law. The bankruptcy court's order on August 26, 2014, then discharged Medley "from all debts that arose before the date of the order for relief." 11 U.S.C. § 727(b). This included Medley's debt to DISH. "A Chapter 7 discharge relieves the debtor of personal liability; it does not nullify a prepetition agreement or render any agreement unenforceable." Maj. Op. at 7 (citing Johnson v. Home State Bank, 501 U.S. 78, 83, 111 S. Ct. 2150, 115 L. Ed. 2d 66 (1991)).  Medley's consent to be contacted by DISH is not a personal liability of Medley, so the consent provision might appear to be no more affected by the discharge order than by the Agreement's rejection.
But here is the reason that I write: the consent provision did not grant DISH an unrestricted right to contact Medley for any reason, for eternity. Medley only authorized DISH "to contact [her] regarding [her] DISH Network account or to recover any unpaid portion of [her] obligation to DISH, through an automated or predictive dialing system or prerecorded messaging system." After the Agreement was rejected, the entirety of Medley's account with DISH was her outstanding obligation for unpaid fees and early termination. And after Medley's personal liability was discharged, she did not have any obligation to DISH, let alone an unpaid obligation. That may mean that under the terms of the contract DISH was not permitted to call her.
* * *
The parties assumed that the critical question was whether Medley could unilaterally revoke her consent, and the Court correctly says no. But this correct holding—that rejection of a contract is not the same as dissolution of a contract—need not invite phantom obligations that can never dissipate. In my view, the parties ignored the logical follow-on question: whether, given the discharge of Medley's debt, DISH's phone calls were permitted by the consent provision. Had Medley raised this argument, it is not clear how we would have resolved it; that would require answering several unbriefed questions of both statutory and contractual interpretation. It may well be that because Medley no longer had any debt, the phone calls were not permitted. Or it could be that DISH had some kind of TCPA or contractual defense against liability for a good-faith error. But the parties did not gather evidence on these issues or brief them, and I see no reason to depart from the general rule that we do not resolve legal issues unless they are properly raised by the parties. See Access Now, Inc. v. Sw. Airlines Co., 385 F.3d 1324, 1330 (11th Cir. 2004) (to evaluate an argument that has not been presented "would undermine the very adversarial nature of our appellate system"); see also Singleton v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 120, 96 S. Ct. 2868, 49 L. Ed. 2d 826 (1976) (federal appellate courts do not generally resolve issues not considered below). Still, it is important to note that the analysis need not always end where the parties left it here.

 

