, concurring in the denial of the stay:
The United States Constitution gives States the power to set the "Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives." U.S. Const. art. I, § 4, cl. 1. And that power "is matched by state control over the election process for state offices." Clingman v. Beaver, 544 U.S. 581, 586, 125 S. Ct. 2029, 161 L. Ed. 2d 920 (2005).
I have serious concerns about the order under review, which is dramatic both in its disregard for Alabama's constitutional authority and in its confidence in the court's own policymaking judgments. The State has responded to the very real COVID-19 threat by moving its election date, dramatically expanding absentee ballot access through an emergency regulation, and taking other steps to maintain safe polling places. The Supreme Court has emphasized time and time again that federal courts should not jump in to change the rules on the eve of an election. See, e.g., Republican Nat'l Comm. v. Democratic Nat'l Comm., 140 S. Ct. 1205, 206 L. Ed. 2d 452 (2020). "A State indisputably has a compelling interest in preserving the integrity of its election process." Purcell v. Gonzalez, 549 U.S. 1, 4, 127 S. Ct. 5, 166 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2006) (citation omitted). And a dangerous virus does not give the federal courts unbridled authority to second-guess and interfere with a State's election rules.
Even so, because it is uncertain that the proper parties have appealed the order's remarkable revisions to the State's absentee ballot rules for its upcoming primary election, I concur in the denial of an emergency stay relating to those revisions. I say no more because, contrary to the alternative concurrence's suggestion, I cannot "assume without deciding that Appellants have standing to appeal the entirety of the district court's injunction." Concurring Op. at 11 n.7. See Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env't, 523 U.S. 83, 101-02, 118 S. Ct. 1003, 140 L. Ed. 2d 210 (1998).
As for the district court's decision to prohibit the Secretary of State from stopping pop-up "curbside voting" in any precinct in Alabama, I question why this statewide ban on a ban is necessary even under the district court's broad view of its own authority. The court has implemented all of the new absentee ballot voting rules that the plaintiffs requested, and found that each of the individual plaintiffs "intends to vote absentee in 2020." Meanwhile, the only individuals who advocate for curbside voting say they would "consider" or "be willing to use" curbside voting—but only if the court did not remove the State's ordinary anti-fraud provisions for anyone who "determines" for themselves that complying with the State's absentee ballot laws is "unreasonable . . . in light of the COVID-19 pandemic." Because the plaintiffs have what they want on absentee voting, I have a hard time seeing why they also need relief on their secondary request. And the organizational plaintiffs' evidence-free contention that some of their members "must vote in-person" does not make sense given the State's new rules providing for universal absentee ballots.
Still, we have no evidence that any jurisdiction is likely to accept the court's invitation to innovation, much less find a way to do so lawfully. Because the order applies only to curbside voting procedures "that otherwise comply with state election law," I reluctantly concur in the denial of an emergency stay with the understanding that unlawful procedures can still be barred.
* * *
No one in this litigation disagrees that the COVID-19 pandemic poses a grave threat. Alabama took serious steps to ensure that its citizens could safely vote—more than some States, less than others. But the district court's order uses the State's legislative and administrative grace against it, concluding that because the State has made some changes, it is constitutionally obligated to make others. Nonetheless, for the reasons explained above, I concur in denying the requested stay.

 

