, concurring in the judgment. In this case the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has offered opposite interpretations of § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) of the Medicaid Act. The first interpretation came in a 2008 regulation that, as the majority recognizes, essentially echoes the statute, see Maj. Op. at 17, the second in an informal 2010 publication (responses to "Frequently Asked Questions") in which the echoes are quite different. That inconsistency is not only "[u]nexplained" by the agency, Nat'l Cable & Telecom. Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 981, 125 S. Ct. 2688, 162 L. Ed. 2d 820 (2005), but unacknowledged by it. Nor is the Act's relevant language ambiguous. Thus, on this record, either the Act's meaning has changed without any action by Congress—a "Living Statute," so to speak—or else one of the agency's interpretations is wrong. I think the agency's 2010 interpretation (if one can call it that) is wrong, whereas the Majority essentially concludes that both interpretations are right. Hence I write separately.
The question presented is whether determination of a hospital's "costs incurred[,]" as § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) uses that term, requires a hospital not only to add up its outlays in providing services to Medicaid patients (which is the usual sense of "cost"), but also to subtract certain payments that the hospital receives for those services. The short answer—as a matter of ordinary English usage, and as § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) uses these terms—is that costs and payments are different concepts, and that the payments a hospital receives for  services are not part of its "costs incurred" in providing them.
Section 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) provides:

(g) Limit on amount of payment to hospital
(1) Amount of adjustment subject to uncompensated costs
(A) In general
A payment adjustment [i.e., payment under § 1396r-4] during a fiscal year shall not be considered to be consistent with [§ 1396r-4] with respect to a hospital if the payment adjustment exceeds the costs incurred during the year of furnishing hospital services (as determined by the Secretary and net of payments under this  subchapter, other than under this section, and by uninsured patients) by the hospital to individuals who either are eligible for medical assistance under the state plan or have no health insurance (or other source of third party coverage) for services provided during the year. . . .
(Emphasis added.)
This provision limits the amount of reimbursement a hospital receives under § 1396r-4 to the hospital's "uncompensated costs[,]" which is itself a term of art defined by the formula set forth in § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A). That formula includes three core elements: "costs," "payments," and "net." All are easy enough to define. The "cost" of providing a service is what one loses in providing that service. See, e.g., Oxford English Dictionary (online ed. 2018) (defining "cost" as the "[t]he spending or outlay of money"). Indeed § 1396r-4 itself defines cost in this way. That section provides not only a cap—in § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A)—for the payment that a particular hospital may receive, but also a floor. That floor can be calculated several ways; the first among them depends on the hospital's "operating costs for inpatient hospital services[.]" § 1396r-4(c)(1). And those costs in turn are defined as "all routine operating costs, ancillary service operating costs, and special care unit operating costs with respect to inpatient hospital services"—in other words, the money that a hospital spends to serve patients. § 1395ww(a)(4).
In contrast, a "payment" is what one receives in return for providing a service. See, e.g., Oxford English Dictionary (online ed. 2018) (defining "payment" as "[a] sum of money . . . in return for goods or services"). The Act is clear about which payments count for purposes of § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A): specifically, payments from Medicaid (i.e., "payments under this subchapter") and from patients themselves (i.e., "by uninsured patients").
The "net," in turn, is what remains after deducting payments from costs. See, e.g., Oxford English Dictionary (online ed. 2018) (defining "net" as what "remain[s] after all necessary deductions"). Section 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) therefore provides a straightforward formula to determine the cap for a hospital's § 1396r-4 payment: the hospital's "costs incurred" in providing Medicaid services, minus certain "payments[,]" equals the "net," i.e., its "uncompensated costs[.]" Thus, the maximum that a hospital may receive under § 1396r-4 in a given year is the difference between the money it spent serving Medicaid patients that year and  certain payments (specifically, payments from Medicaid and from uninsured patients) it received in return.
The 2008 regulation is as clear as the Act. As the Majority points out, the regulation specifically lists the payments that hospitals must deduct. Payments from Medicare and private insurers are not among them. See 42 C.F.R. § 447.299 (2008).
But now—per the agency's 2010 responses to "Frequently Answered Questions" (and later in a regulation promulgated in 2017, see 42 C.F.R. § 447.299(c)(10)(i))—the  agency asserts that payments from Medicare and private insurers indeed must be included in the calculation set forth in § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A). That calculation, to reiterate, is simple: a hospital's "costs incurred" in providing Medicaid services, minus certain enumerated payments (which do not include payments from Medicare or private insurers), equals the "net," i.e., the hospital's "uncompensated costs." Payments from Medicare and private insurers (referred to from here as "unenumerated payments") do not, in the agency's view, actually count as "payments" in this calculation. Instead, the agency says, unenumerated payments are part of the determination of a hospital's costs incurred in providing Medicaid services. Specifically, the agency points out that, under § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A), "'costs incurred' are 'as determined by the Secretary[,]'" CMS Br. at 18 (agency's emphasis); and thus, the agency argues, the Secretary (meaning here CMS), has discretion to deduct unenumerated payments for Medicaid services from the hospital's outlays for those services in determining the hospitals' "costs incurred" for them.
In making that argument the agency seriously overplays its hand. True, § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) expressly grants the agency a measure of discretion in prescribing what counts towards a hospital's "costs incurred." And that means the agency has discretion to prescribe, in the sort of minute detail that calls upon its expertise, the specific outlays that count towards a hospital's "costs incurred" for a particular service. Those outlays might include, for example, the hospital's direct costs of providing the service (for which the agency might prescribe a rate schedule), plus some portion (as prescribed by the agency) of the hospital's costs for overhead.
But just as the statutory delegation is circumscribed by the English language, so too is the agency's discretion. As an initial matter, per the statute's plain terms, the express grant of  discretion ("as determined by the Secretary") modifies only "costs incurred[,]" not "net of payments." And § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) clearly enumerates the payments that count in this calculation (i.e., payments from Medicaid and by the patients themselves), without any catchall language that would bring in payments from third parties generally. Thus, § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) is "silent" as to whether other, unenumerated payments count in this calculation only in the sense that, say, "children 12 and under admitted free" is silent as to whether 13-year-olds must pay. Moreover, § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) itself, as well as § 1396r-4(g)(2)(A), make clear that, when Congress wanted to refer to "third party payment" or "third party payors[,]" respectively, it was fully capable of doing so. For good reason, then, CMS focuses instead on its discretion to determine what counts as "costs incurred."
As for that discretion, "costs" are outflows of money; "payments" are inflows. And nothing in the phrase "costs incurred . . . as determined by the Secretary" allows the agency to redefine "costs" to include "payments." The agency counters (and the Majority agrees) that "'words like "cost" give' agencies 'broad methodological leeway.'" CMS Br. at 39 (quoting Verizon Communs., Inc. v. FCC, 535 U.S. 467, 500, 122 S. Ct. 1646, 152 L. Ed. 2d 701 (2002)). But again that leeway does not extend to treating "payments" as "costs," as Verizon itself illustrates. There, as here, "cost" was "an intermediate term" in a formula for determining another statutory number—there, the "just and reasonable rates" that a telecommunications provider could charge its customers. Id. at 499-500. The agency's "leeway" there concerned the "expenditures"—which is to say, the outlays—that would count as "costs" for purposes of that  determination. Id. at 498-99 (emphasis added). Thus, the agency here seeks to cross a linguistic line that Verizon never contemplated. Moreover, § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) expressly treats "costs," "payments," and "net" as separate concepts; and "it would have been passing strange" to think that, "in the very same sentence," Congress meant to collapse all three concepts into one. See id. at 500. Yet that is what CMS does when it says that a hospital's "costs incurred" in providing a service are the net of its outlays for that service minus unenumerated payments (from which net, in the agency's view, the hospital then deducts the enumerated payments, for the "net" of its uncompensated costs).
Agencies have a strong incentive (namely, Chevron) to make statutory language seem more complicated than it actually is. Here, as shown above, the statutory formula is  straightforward: costs, minus certain clearly enumerated payments, equals the net of a hospital's "uncompensated costs." The only confusion inheres in the agency's own efforts to convince us to read the statute contrary to its terms. Meanwhile, the plaintiffs, for their part, have chosen not to argue that the agency's responses to "Frequently Asked Questions" are unworthy of deference, and that the only agency action to which we ever could defer in this case is the 2008 regulation—which says the opposite of what the agency says now.
In the end, however, the formula in § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) is discernable easily enough by means of "the traditional tools of statutory construction." Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 843 n.9, 104 S. Ct. 2778, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694, (1984). The agency's 2008 regulation substantially honors the statute's terms, whereas the agency's later about-face does not. Thus, the agency's current interpretation of § 1396r-4(g)(1)(A) is invalid substantively, as well as (in this case) procedurally. Hence the district court was right on both points.

 

