, concurring. Our precedents have sent mixed signals regarding the scope of 18 U.S.C. § 3742. But the statute itself, I respectfully submit, is clear. Specifically, § 3742(a) by its terms is completely inapposite in a case  where the district court denies a defendant's motion to modify his sentence. What § 3742 plainly does, rather, is regulate from start to finish a circuit court's review of sentences newly imposed by the district court.
Section 3742(a) provides:
(a) Appeal by a defendant.—A defendant may file a notice of appeal in the district court for review of an otherwise final sentence if the sentence—
(1) was imposed in violation of law;
(2) was imposed as a result of an incorrect application of the sentencing guidelines;
(3) is greater than the sentence specified in the applicable guideline range to the extent that the sentence includes a greater fine or term of imprisonment . . . than the maximum established in the guideline range . . . ; or
(4) was imposed for an offense for which there is no sentencing guideline and is plainly unreasonable.
By its plain terms, § 3742(a) applies only where a defendant seeks "review of an otherwise final sentence"—rather than where, as here, a party seeks review of some other decision by a district court. (Section 3742(b) is a nearly identical provision applicable where the government seeks "review of an otherwise final sentence[.]") The remainder of § 3742 leaves no doubt on this point. Section 3742(d) provides that, if a party files a notice of appeal under § 3742(a) or (b), the clerk of the district court "shall certify to the court of appeals" the record of "the sentencing proceeding." Section 3742(e) provides in turn that, "[u]pon review of the record, the court of appeals shall determine whether the sentence" was, among other things, "imposed in violation of law" or "imposed as a result of an incorrect application of the sentencing  guidelines[.]" Section 3742(f)—entitled "Decision and disposition"—provides that the court of appeals shall either "affirm the sentence" or "remand the case for further sentencing proceedings[,]" depending on whether, among other things, "the sentence was imposed in violation of law or imposed as a result of an incorrect application of the sentencing guidelines[.]" And § 3742(g) provides that, if the case is remanded, the district court shall "resentence [the] defendant[.]"
Thus, § 3742 does not apply when an appeal merely, in some sense, involves a final sentence; for § 3742 to apply, rather, a party must seek review of the sentence itself. Section 3742 therefore applies when a party seeks review of district court's decision to grant a defendant's motion to reduce his sentence—for in that case, by definition, the court imposes a new sentence. But § 3742 does not apply when, as here, a defendant appeals the district court's denial of his motion to reduce his sentence: for then the defendant seeks review of the denial, rather than "review of [the] otherwise final sentence" imposed years before. 18 U.S.C. § 3742(a); accord United States v. Jones, 846 F.3d 366, 370, 427 U.S. App. D.C. 271 (D.C. Cir. 2017) (holding that, because "the district court's denials of appellants' sentence-reduction motions resulted only in final orders—not new sentences by any definition—it appears that at least the most obvious reading of § 3742 renders it inapplicable").
Thus, when a defendant seeks review of a district court's denial of a sentence-reduction motion, § 3742 neither limits our "jurisdiction" over the appeal, nor confines our power to grant certain types of relief. Instead, in appeals like this one, § 3742 simply does not apply at all.

 

