, concurring in the judgment. The power to sentence a criminal defendant lies not with this court or the parties themselves, but with the district court. See, e.g., Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38, 51-53, 128 S. Ct. 586, 169 L. Ed. 2d 445 (2007). Our role is simply to review the district court's exercise of that power for an abuse of discretion. And nothing in Criminal Rule 11 or elsewhere in the law allows the parties to arrogate the district court's sentencing power simply by agreeing upon a particular sentence. Hence that agreement does not create some sort of presumption that the district court must then overcome. That the parties agreed upon particular sentences here, therefore, does not mean that the district court was obligated to offer up reasons as to why those sentences were unreasonable. Instead, that a district court thinks it might want to impose a different sentence than the one chosen by the parties—even, say, a sentence different by only a month—is reason enough for the court to reject a plea agreement under Rule 11(c)(1)(C). Accord United States v. Robertson, 45 F.3d 1423, 1439 (10th Cir. 1995). In short, the district court owes zero deference to the sentencing determinations of the parties; instead all the deference runs the other way.
Rule 11(c) confirms as much. As an initial matter, contrary to the majority's suggestion, the Rule allows a district court freely to reject an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement before the court reviews the defendant's presentence report. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(3)(A). True, the better practice in most cases might be to review the report first; but the Rule itself contains no such requirement. But more to the point, the Rule itself tells us what "the [district] court must do" when "the court rejects" a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) agreement: namely, the court must inform the parties of the rejection and advise the defendant of various things—which do not include an explanation as to why the court rejected the agreement. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(5).
All that said, a district court should not categorically refuse to consider Rule 11(c)(1)(C) agreements, since doing so would make that subsection of the Rule (which is itself law) a dead letter. And  though the court need not formally recite its reasons for rejecting such an agreement, the record as a whole must afford our court an adequate basis to determine whether the rejection  was an abuse of discretion. See, e.g., United States v. Howard, 644 F.3d 455, 459 (6th Cir. 2011). Such abuses remain possible: if the record indicates that the district court rejected the agreement for an impermissible reason, for example, that could be an abuse of discretion. See Robertson, 45 F.3d at 1438 (district court's rejection of a plea agreement based upon the court's own trial calendar was an abuse of discretion).
An impermissible reason is what I think supports vacatur of the district court's rejection of the plea agreement here. Specifically, the record as a whole suggests that the court's rejection was based in part upon the court's belief (as the court explained in a later hearing) that the defendants did not qualify for safety-valve relief under U.S.S.G. § 5C1.2. As the Majority explains, Maj. Op. at 12-13, that belief was legally mistaken. And a decision based upon a legal mistake is an abuse of discretion. See United States v. Mandoka, 869 F.3d 448, 452-53 (6th Cir. 2017).
For these reasons, I concur in the judgment only.

 

