
Congress requires plaintiffs in federal securities fraud cases to plead with great specificity. Under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA), a complaint must, "with respect to each act or omission," "state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind." 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(2)(A).
Accordingly, for a securities fraud plaintiff to survive a motion to dismiss, it is not enough to simply assert that a defendant made a false statement with the requisite state of mind. Rather, the plaintiff must plead specific facts that support a strong inference that the defendant made a false statement with the requisite state of mind. See, e.g., Local 731 I.B. of T. Excavators & Pavers Pension Tr. Fund v. Diodes, Inc., 810 F.3d 951, 961 (5th Cir. 2016) ("Whether viewing the above three classes of allegations individually or as a whole, [plaintiff] has inadequately pled facts in its amended complaint that give rise to a strong inference of scienter on the part of the defendants."); Ind. Elec. Workers' Pension Tr. Fund IBEW v. Shaw Grp., Inc., 537 F.3d 527, 533 (5th Cir. 2008) ("[F]or 'each act or omission alleged' to be false or misleading, plaintiffs must 'state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind.'"); Horizon Asset Mgmt. Inc. v. H&R Block, Inc., 580 F.3d 755, 761 (8th Cir. 2009) ("[Plaintiff] must nevertheless raise a strong inference of scienter for each defendant and with respect to each alleged misrepresentation.").
In crafting this strict pleading requirement, Congress balanced competing concerns. On the one hand, an overly stringent pleading standard could result in under-enforcement of the securities laws—some meritorious cases might be dismissed on the pleadings. On the other hand, applying the ordinary pleading standard in the securities fraud context could result in over-enforcement—some unmeritorious cases could lead to in terrorem settlements if they are permitted to survive the pleading stage. See, e.g., Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc. v. Dabit, 547 U.S. 71, 81, 126 S. Ct. 1503, 164 L. Ed. 2d 179 (2006). By enacting the PSLRA, Congress made the policy judgment that the societal value lost from dismissing certain meritorious suits is outweighed by the societal cost of permitting abusive securities fraud claims to survive the pleading stage. See id. at 81-82.
In this case, the operative complaint alleges that false statements were made. But it fails to connect those false statements to a particular person who acted with the requisite intent.
The majority focuses on the allegedly false statements made by Hanger's CFO, George McHenry. It does so based almost entirely on findings made by Hanger's Audit Committee. As the majority recounts, the Audit Committee Report explains that "[i]t is more likely than not" that "former employees and officers"—a group that includes, but is not limited to, McHenry—"engaged in inappropriate historical accounting practices relating to management estimates and certain accruals." Op. 12. It also states that "management's estimate of quarterly cost of materials was inappropriately reduced with the objective of attaining  financial targets" for certain periods. Op. 12.
But the majority acknowledges that the Audit Committee Report does not tell us which inappropriate accounting practices McHenry engaged in. See Op. 17-18 ("[T]he June 8-K does not identify McHenry's particular inappropriate practices. . . . [The Report] makes no reference to McHenry's objective."). It tells us that someone may have engaged in inappropriate accounting practices with the requisite scienter. But it does not tell us whether McHenry or any other specific person did so. There is no indication of the size of group that likely engaged in inappropriate accounting, no indication that the individuals in that group worked together or actively coordinated, and no indication as to McHenry's particular state of mind. See Op. 12 ("But [the Report's] findings are written in the passive voice and do not identify who made those adjustments with such intent.").
Instead, the complaint broadly alleges that the Audit Committee Report "prove[s] that Defendants were fraudulently manipulating Hanger's financial results and deliberately intended to defraud investors." But the complaint makes no effort to demonstrate which portions of the Report show that McHenry, or any other defendant, had the requisite scienter. As a result, the complaint falls short of PSLRA's stringent pleading standard.
The majority concludes that the Audit Committee Report "support[s] the inference" that McHenry "shared the objectives of improperly enhancing Hanger's financial results, or that he at least knew that others were doing so," and therefore possessed the requisite scienter. Op. 18.
But merely "support[ing]" or "contribut[ing] to" an inference of scienter is not enough. Op. 18. The PSLRA requires plaintiffs to "state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind." 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(2)(A) (emphasis added). "To qualify as 'strong' . . . an inference of scienter must be more than merely plausible or reasonable—it must be cogent and at least as compelling as any opposing inference of nonfraudulent intent." Tellabs, Inc. v. Makor Issues & Rights, Ltd., 551 U.S. 308, 314, 127 S. Ct. 2499, 168 L. Ed. 2d 179 (2007). To be sure, the majority takes the allegations "holistically" before concluding that the pleadings give rise to a strong inference of scienter as to McHenry. Op. 21-22. But it is unclear what meaningfully contributes to a strong inference of scienter other than the Audit Committee Report—in fact, the majority concludes that the other allegations of scienter contribute only slightly or not at all. See Op. 21-22 ("From the Audit Committee's report, we can infer that McHenry intended to enhance Hanger's financial results.").
* * *
Our role as judges is to faithfully interpret the text of the statutes passed by Congress. The plaintiffs in this suit failed to satisfy the stringent pleading requirements set forth in the PSLRA. Accordingly, the judgment of the district court should be affirmed in full. I respectfully dissent.

 

