
The district court found this to be a frivolous case. What's more, it is the third time a federal court has deemed an action by the plaintiff here frivolous—triggering the "three strikes" rule under the Prison Litigation Reform Act. A prisoner with three strikes may not bring an action or appeal in forma pauperis ("IFP"), except in cases of imminent danger of serious physical injury. Under the plain terms of 28 U.S.C. § 1915, this prohibition on IFP appeals applies even where, as here, the third strike is the very subject of the appeal.
The defendants did not object to IFP status in this appeal, so I join the per curiam decision affirming the district court on the merits. But I write separately to spell out the terms of the PLRA, out of respect for Congress's directive to the courts to deny IFP status to repeat frivolous claimants, and to instead focus our limited resources on litigants with worthier claims.
I.
Congress enacted the nation's first IFP statute in 1892 "to ensure that indigent litigants have meaningful access to the federal courts," by having their "filing fees and court costs . . . assumed by the public." Neitzke v. Williams, 490 U.S. 319, 324, 109 S. Ct. 1827, 104 L. Ed. 2d 338 (1989). That enactment has led, however, to the proliferation of frivolous and wasteful IFP suits. Frivolous lawsuits and appeals are not only a waste of limited resources—they divert valuable judicial time and attention away from the resolution of more worthy disputes. And prison inmates, armed with the ability to file repeated suits IFP under 28 U.S.C. § 1915, are responsible for much of the problem. See, e.g., Roller v. Gunn, 107 F.3d 227, 230 (4th Cir. 1997) ("In 1995, prisoners brought over 25% of the civil cases filed in the federal district courts. In this circuit alone,  IFP filings accounted for almost half of the court's 1995 caseload, and prisoners were responsible for 75% of those filings.") (citations omitted).
In response, Congress enacted the Prison Litigation Reform Act in 1996. The PLRA revised the federal IFP statute to require a prisoner to execute an affidavit attesting to his poverty and to file a certified copy of his prison trust account in order to obtain IFP status. 28 U.S.C. § 1915(a)(1) & (2). If IFP status is granted, the prisoner is excused from pre-paying the full amount of the applicable filing and docketing fees. Id. § 1915(b)(1). Instead, the inmate may break up the expense—he can pay a portion of the total fee upfront, and then make monthly payments from his prison trust fund until the full amount is satisfied. Id. § 1915(b)(2). By requiring the prisoner to pay the necessary fees—albeit on an installment plan—the PLRA addresses the reality that a "litigant whose filing fees and court costs are assumed by the public, unlike a paying litigant, lacks an economic incentive to refrain from filing frivolous, malicious, or repetitive lawsuits." Neitzke, 490 U.S. at 324.
Most relevant here, the PLRA also implemented a "three strikes" rule that "limits a prisoner's ability to proceed I.F.P. if the prisoner abuses the judicial system by filing frivolous actions." Abdul-Akbar v. McKelvie, 239 F.3d 307, 312 (3d Cir. 2001) (en banc). Specifically, § 1915(g) provides that a prisoner who accrues three strikes for filing frivolous actions or appeals is thereby barred from proceeding IFP in the future, unless he can show imminent threat of physical injury:
In no event shall a prisoner bring a civil action or appeal a judgment in a civil action or proceeding under this section if the prisoner has, on 3 or more prior occasions, while incarcerated or detained in any facility, brought an action or appeal in a court of the United States that was dismissed on the grounds that it is frivolous, malicious, or fails to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, unless the prisoner is under imminent danger of serious physical injury.
28 U.S.C. § 1915(g) (emphasis added).
II.
This appeal should not have been brought IFP. The district court found this case to be frivolous. It is the third time an action by the plaintiff has been deemed frivolous. And under the plain text of 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g), that should have barred the plaintiff from bringing this IFP appeal.
In Coleman v. Tollefson, 575 U.S. 532, 135 S. Ct. 1759, 191 L. Ed. 2d 803 (2015), the prisoner filed multiple federal lawsuits, three of which had been dismissed for failure to state a claim. Id. at 1762. As he was in the process of appealing his third dismissal, he concurrently filed additional lawsuits, and requested IFP status in each. Id. Coleman argued that his third dismissal could not yet count as a "prior occasion" until the conclusion of any and all appeals from that dismissal.
The Supreme Court unanimously disagreed. "Linguistically speaking, we see nothing about the phrase 'prior occasions' that would transform a dismissal into a dismissal-plus-appellate-review." Id. at 1763. Under the plain language of the text, the Court concluded that a "prior dismissal on a statutorily enumerated ground counts as a strike even if the dismissal is the subject of an appeal. That, after all, is what the statute literally says." Id. The word "occasion," the Court explained, is normally understood to be "a particular occurrence," a "happening," or an "incident." Id. (quoting dictionary definitions). A district court dismissal and a subsequent appeal are discrete events and thus different "occasions."
 This conclusion is further reinforced by surrounding statutory text. The statute turns on whether a prisoner has "on 3 or more prior occasions . . . brought an action or appeal" that resulted in a strike under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g) (emphasis added). So the statute itself makes clear that either an action "or" an appeal may constitute a "prior occasion." Id. In addition, the "text provides that the relevant 'occasion' is the bringing of the action or appeal"—and a district court proceeding and subsequent appeal are "necessarily 'brought' on two different occasions." Taylor v. Grubbs, 930 F.3d 611, 623 (4th Cir. 2019) (Richardson, J., dissenting). And the Supreme Court has noted that, when an action is "dismissed" in the district court, that "linguistic term," "taken alone, does not normally include subsequent appellate activity." Coleman, 135 S. Ct. at 1763.
So an action in district court and a subsequent appeal of the district court judgment are necessarily separate "occasions." And there is no question that the district court judgment under review here is a "prior" occasion, since it necessarily precedes this appeal. See, e.g., Prior, Webster's New International Dictionary (2d ed. 1934) ("prior" means "preceding in the order of time," or "earlier, and therefore taking precedence").
To be sure, this case presents a slightly different factual situation than Coleman. In both instances, the potential third strike arises from a district court judgment that is pending on appeal. But in Coleman, the Court denied IFP status to the prisoner in other cases during the pendency of that appeal. This case, by contrast, involves IFP status in that very same appeal.
The Supreme Court reserved judgment on the factual circumstances presented here. Coleman, 135 S. Ct. at 1764-65. But the logic of the Court's textual analysis readily applies in these situations: A "prior dismissal on a statutorily enumerated ground counts as a strike even if the dismissal is the subject of an appeal. That, after all, is what the statute literally says." Id. at 1763. And that is so whether we are applying the third strike analysis to an entirely separate case (as in Coleman) or to the appeal of the same underlying case (as here).
Accordingly, I agree with the Third and Seventh Circuits that the PLRA bars prisoners in Alexander's position from proceeding IFP on appeal. See Parker v. Montgomery Cty. Corr. Facility, 870 F.3d 144, 146 (3d Cir. 2017) (denying IFP status under similar circumstances "based upon the plain text of the statute, and guided by the Supreme Court's reasoning in Coleman"); Robinson v. Powell, 297 F.3d 540, 541 (7th Cir. 2002) (holding that authorizing an IFP appeal in this situation was "contrary to the language of the statute").
III.
A previous panel of this court reached the opposite conclusion. In Adepegba v. Hammons, 103 F.3d 383 (5th Cir. 1996), we concluded that "[a] dismissal should not count against a petitioner until he has exhausted or waived his appeals." Id. at 387. But that was decades before the Supreme Court stated the opposite proposition in Coleman—namely, that "courts must count the dismissal even though it remains pending on appeal." 135 S. Ct. at 1761 (emphasis added). See Gahagan v. U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Servs., 911 F.3d 298, 302 (5th Cir. 2018) ("Fifth Circuit precedent is implicitly overruled if a subsequent Supreme Court opinion 'establishes a rule of law inconsistent with' that precedent.") (quoting Gonzalez v. Thaler, 623 F.3d 222, 226 (5th Cir. 2010)).
In addition, Adepegba relies on an absurdity argument that I find unconvincing  and insufficient to override statutory text. To begin with, the panel in Adepegba acknowledged that "it is possible to read the statute" as I do today—after all, "section 1915(g) only requires that on three or more prior occasions a prisoner have had an action dismissed" as frivolous, and "does not proscribe any cure for erroneous dismissals." Adepegba, 103 F.3d at 387. The panel nevertheless set aside the text, and refused to count the district court judgment pending appeal as a strike, because it is "an extreme reading" and "an absurd result we cannot believe Congress intended." Id.
But it is hardly absurd for Congress to ignore what is undoubtedly the rarest of occurrences—where a district court finds a prisoner claim so unworthy as to be frivolous, and yet a court of appeals subsequently finds the claim not only non-frivolous, but deserving of relief. See, e.g., Brief for Respondents at 48, Coleman v. Tollefson, 575 U.S. 532, 135 S. Ct. 1759, 191 L. Ed. 2d 803 (2015) (No. 13-1333) ("[P]robability-wise, [this is] likely to be a very small subset of cases."). The absurdity canon does not allow us to warp statutory text to accommodate outlier circumstances. See Shady Grove Orthopedic Assocs., P.A. v. Allstate Ins. Co., 559 U.S. 393, 414 n.13, 130 S. Ct. 1431, 176 L. Ed. 2d 311 (2010) ("The possible existence of a few outlier instances does not prove [that an] interpretation is absurd."); cf. Richard A. Epstein, Simple Rules For A Complex World 38-39 (1995) ("Simple rules . . . work most of the time, but are known and expected to fail some of the time," whereas "complex rules" are motivated by the "relentless, if naive, pursuit of perfection.").
Moreover, the danger of this anomalous third strike is a "risk that falls only on prisoners who have already demonstrated on three occasions a propensity to abuse the judicial system." Brief for Respondents at 42, Coleman. "There is nothing harsh"—much less absurd—"about subjecting such a prisoner to consequences for that continued abuse." Id. To the contrary, it's the whole point of the PLRA.
Nor do I find persuasive the reasoning of the three circuits that depart from the plain text interpretation adopted by the Third and Seventh Circuits.
The Ninth Circuit, for example, relied primarily on language from the Solicitor General's brief in Coleman. See Richey v. Dahne, 807 F.3d 1202, 1204 (9th Cir. 2015). But its opinion never confronts the textual analysis adopted by the Supreme Court in Coleman. Nor does it address the express textual distinction between "actions" and "appeals" under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g). Instead, the Ninth Circuit expressed policy concerns about "freez[ing] out meritorious claims or ossify[ing] district court errors." Richey, 807 F.3d at 1209 (quotations omitted). But statutory interpretation is an exercise in reading, not writing. Federal courts are not permitted to recraft statutes to suit judicial sensibilities. See Barnhart v. Sigmon Coal Co., Inc., 534 U.S. 438, 462, 122 S. Ct. 941, 151 L. Ed. 2d 908 (2002) ("We will not alter the text in order to satisfypolicy preferences . . . . These are battles that should be fought among the political branches and the industry. Those parties should not seek to amend the statute by appeal to the Judicial Branch.").
The Tenth Circuit likewise reached its conclusion without any textual consideration. It simply relied on its own circuit precedent, decided before Coleman, in a footnote in an unpublished opinion. See Dawson v. Coffman, 651 F. App'x 840, 842 n.2 (10th Cir. 2016).
Finally, the Fourth Circuit (over a persuasive dissent by Judge Richardson) justified IFP status under these circumstances largely based on the surplusage canon. See Taylor, 930 F.3d at 617. The  theory goes like this: Under our reading, there is no difference between "prior occasion" and "occasion"—after all, "a strike imposed on any occasion will always be 'prior' to a court's decision to grant or deny a motion to proceed in forma pauperis." Id.
But that misreads the statute. The statutory text states that courts must count findings of frivolousness "prior" to "a prisoner bring[ing] a civil action or appeal," 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g)—not prior to "a court's decision to grant or deny a motion to proceed in forma pauperis," as the Fourth Circuit panel majority suggests, Taylor, 930 F.3d at 617. This distinction can make a difference in certain (albeit rare) cases. Imagine the following situation: A prisoner has accrued two strikes. He files a new lawsuit and seeks IFP status. He subsequently receives a third strike in a previously filed action or appeal. Would that third strike result in a denial of IFP status in the new pending lawsuit? No: The third strike would be an "occasion" under the statute—but not one "prior" to the "prisoner bring[ing] a civil action or appeal." 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g).
So contrary to the Fourth Circuit's analysis, the word "prior" has substantive meaning. The Third Circuit has reached the same conclusion. See Parker, 870 F.3d at 153 ("In our view, the term 'prior' sets a temporal parameter, referring only to strikes accrued earlier in time than the notice of appeal. . . . Thus, in our view, 'prior' has meaning.").2 
* * *
Serial filers of frivolous lawsuits do a disservice, not only to themselves by wasting their IFP opportunities, but to all litigants who present worthwhile claims before the courts. Since Magna Carta, a cardinal principle of Anglo-American law is that justice will not be delayed. But consuming judicial resources with meritless appeals crowds out those with legitimate claims to redress.
Congress recognized this problem and took remedial steps to fix it when it enacted the PLRA. As judges, we are limited to interpreting statutes—not rewriting them to suit our own preferences or sense of justice. And Congress has made clear in the PLRA that prisoners may not proceed IFP on appeal following any three strikes, inclusive of the underlying district court action under review. I respectfully concur.

 

