
I am pleased to join Chief Judge Stewart's opinion for the court, with which I fully agree. The genesis of this case is, however, troubling, and worth noting. It is an unsavory vehicle in which to be discussing significant theories of law.
How Alvarez1  obtained his habeas relief in the state appellate court, using his then-attorney Lucio, who later became a co-defendant in a federal RICO and bribery prosecution against then-Cameron County DA Villalobos, is more than suspicious. The state courts were presented a redacted video of the encounter between Alvarez and Officer Arias, which omitted a crucial 30† seconds leading up to their tussle. In that period of time, it was evident that Alvarez was arguing with and resisting the officers' instructions to move from one cell into another. Unredacted, the video portrays a much more complex picture of events than the "self defense" theory propounded by attorney Lucio. Lucio also offered the supporting testimony of Alvarez's former attorney, de la Fuente, an unindicted co-conspirator in the bribery case. In the state habeas court, the DA's office, oddly, never questioned the video, immediately agreed to a new trial, and apparently offered an agreed set of findings and conclusions. That court granted only a new trial. When Lucio appealed to the state appellate court on his "actual innocence" theory—which is supportable only if one sees no more than the redacted video—the DA filed no response. After the appellate court remanded, the DA quickly dismissed charges. One may surmise, as Gilbert & Sullivan wrote in Trial by Jury, Alvarez's release "was managed by a job, and a good job too."
For present purposes, the point is that without having been "exonerated" by the state courts, Alvarez could not pursue his very novel Section 1983 claim against the City. See Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S. 477, 486-87, 114 S. Ct. 2364, 2372, 129 L. Ed. 2d 383 (1994). Alvarez's damage suit proceeded contemporaneously in federal court with the RICO/bribery charges against the former DA and his attorney cohorts. Indeed, the judge originally assigned to Alvarez's case had to recuse when he became responsible for the criminal case. In the bribery prosecution, Alvarez's habeas case was mentioned indirectly. The City's attorneys attempted repeatedly to challenge the  redacted video in Alvarez's civil suit, but the federal court ignored their efforts. Why? I do not understand the district court's unwillingness to explore whether Alvarez's case was founded on doctored evidence. If doctored evidence tainted Alvarez's habeas case, the federal court would have had to consider ethical action against certain attorneys. On the other hand, it would not have had to opine on unusual issues concerning municipal liability and the ramifications of the Brady doctrine.
Allegations of doctored evidence here may have been misplaced, but surely they were not frivolous. Because factual integrity is the gateway to litigating a claim in court, Fed. R. Civ. P. 11, integrity in the fact-finding process must be maintained vigilantly. No defendant, including the City, should be persecuted by means of litigation with a false foundation. It's unfortunate if that is what happened here.
I urge our colleagues at the district court level to be more attuned to non-frivolous complaints of potentially unethical behavior.
STEPHEN HIGGINSON