s, concurring in part and dissenting in part:
We join Judge Willett's opinion.1  We write separately in response to the suggestion  that there is no constitutional problem because this case does not involve the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board ("PCAOB"), the Comptroller General, or the Postmaster General. Post, at 97-107 (Higginson, J.). Our learned colleague suggests that: (I) the Constitution's original public meaning offers little guidance on the scope of the removal power; (II) the Supreme Court's precedents don't help the shareholders here; and (III) even if they did, we have the "judicial" power to rewrite Congress's law. With greatest respect, that's all wrong.
I.
The Constitution vests in the President the power to remove executive officers. Any intimation to the contrary must be rejected.
A.
Traditionally, the executive power allowed the head of state to appoint and remove his ministers, as well as his judges, at will. See 1 William Blackstone, Commentaries *260 [hereinafter Blackstone's Commentaries] (describing English efforts to "remove all judicial power out of the hands of the king's privy council"); id. at *261-63 (explaining that "the king is . . . the fountain of honour, of office, and of privilege," that the king holds "the prerogative of erecting and disposing of offices," and that "the king . . . is the best and only judge, in what capacities, with what privileges, and under what distinctions, his people are the best qualified to serve, and to act under him"); 2 Thomas Rutherforth, Institutes of Natural Law 60 (1756) (noting that officers "are the agents of the executive power; and consequently the appointment of them belongs to this power"). The American colonies chafed at the corrupting effects of this unbridled power. See, e.g., Declaration of Independence para. 11 (1776) ("[The King] has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries"); Declaration of Rights and Grievances para. 4 (1774) (condemning as "impolitic, unjust, and cruel, as well as unconstitutional" the Massachusetts Government Act, 14 Geo. 3 c. 45, which empowered the King's representative to appoint and remove—at will—the Province's officers and judges).
In response, some early State constitutions limited the executive power to appoint judges and officers. See, e.g., S.C. CONST. of Mar. 26, 1776 art. XXII (assigning to the legislature the power to choose "the commissioners of the treasury, the secretary of the colony, register of mesne conveyances, attorney-general, and powder receiver"); Va. Const. of 1776 paras. 35, 36 (requiring legislative approval for the governor's judicial appointments). Others limited the removal power, and granted civil and judicial officers freedom from executive interference "during good behavior."2  N.Y. Const. of 1777, art. XXIV. See also Md. Const. of 1776 art. XL (granting "good behaviour" tenure to the attorney-general); id. art. XLVIII (permitting the governor to remove only those "civil officer[s] who ha[ve] not a commission during good behavior"); MASS. CONST. of 1780 pt. 2, ch. III, art. 1 (providing that "[a]ll judicial officers . . . shall hold their offices during good behavior," but allowing the governor to remove them "with consent of the council . . . upon address of both houses of the legislature").
When the Framers drafted the federal Constitution, they had the same options before them. Ultimately, they chose to give Article III judges "good Behaviour" protection from presidential interference, see U.S. Const. art. III, § 1, cl. 2, and mandated Senate approval for appointments of superior officers, see U.S. Const. art. II, § 2, cl. 2. The Constitution therefore took away the traditional executive power to remove judges and to appoint officers unilaterally. But the Framers chose not to grant "good behavior" tenure to officers, as some States had done. By that omission, the Framers kept for the President the executive's traditional at-will removal power over superior officers.3  See Steven Calabresi & Saikrishna Prakash, The President's Power to Execute the Laws, 104 YALE L.J. 541, 597 (1994).
B.
What the text and structure of the Constitution provide, the historical practice confirms. Start with the very first Congress.
On March 4, 1789, Congress convened in New York City. 1 Annals Of Cong. 15, 95 (1789). One of its first orders of business was to propagate the Executive Branch. Representative James Madison moved "that there shall be established an Executive Department, to be denominated the Department of Foreign Affairs, at the head of which there shall be an officer, to be called the Secretary to the Department of Foreign Affairs, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate; and to be removable by the President." Id. at 370-71.
The motion sparked a debate "centered around whether the Congress 'should recognize and declare the power of the President under the Constitution to remove the Secretary of Foreign Affairs without the advice and consent of the Senate.'" See Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714, 723, 106 S. Ct. 3181, 92 L. Ed. 2d 583 (1986) (quoting Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 114, 47 S. Ct. 21, 71 L. Ed. 160 (1926)). And it culminated in the famed "Decision of 1789" in which a majority of both legislative chambers agreed that "the Constitution's grant of executive power authorized the President to remove executive officers." Saikrishna Prakash, New Light on the Decision of 1789, 91 Cornell L. Rev. 1021, 1023 (2006) [hereinafter Prakash, Decision of 1789]; see also 1 Annals Of Cong. at 399.
Up until the Civil War, there was virtually no doubt that the Decision of 1789 was correct. Presidents Washington, Adams, and Jefferson relied on that power to remove over 170 officers. Prakash, Decision of 1789, supra, at 1066. In their respective Commentaries in the 1820s and 1830s, Chancellor James Kent and Justice Joseph Story considered the matter settled and  beyond alteration. See Myers, 272 U.S. at 148-50.
Congress briefly flirted with revisiting the issue after the Civil War. In 1867, Congress passed the Tenure of Office Act (over the President's veto), reversed its longstanding position, and claimed for itself the power to condition removal on the advice and consent of the Senate. See Tenure of Office Act, ch. 154, 14 Stat. 430 (1867). But even then, it was questionable whether Congress considered the Act to be constitutional. See Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. at 494 n.3 (noting that the law "was widely regarded as unconstitutional and void (as it is universally regarded today)"). Its passage was undoubtedly motivated by animus towards President Johnson. See Grover Cleveland, the Independence of the Executive 29 (1913). Less than two months into President Grant's tenure, it was repealed in part to permit the President to suspend officers "until the end of the next session of the Senate." 16 Stat. 6, 7. It was repealed in its entirety in 1887. See 24 Stat. 500.
The history of the use of the removal power—and congressional acquiescence in that use—matters. In interpreting the Constitution, "we put significant weight upon historical practice," particularly where the issues "concern the allocation of power between two elected branches of Government." NLRB v. Noel Canning, 573 U.S. 513, 524, 134 S. Ct. 2550, 189 L. Ed. 2d 538 (2014). Indeed, "a practice of at least twenty years duration on the part of the executive department, acquiesced in by the legislative department, is entitled to great regard in determining the true construction of a constitutional provision the phraseology of which is in any respect of doubtful meaning." The Pocket Veto Case, 279 U.S. 655, 690, 49 S. Ct. 463, 73 L. Ed. 894, 68 Ct. Cl. 786 (1929) (quotation omitted). We should therefore be especially hesitant to interfere with an executive power that was exercised, unfettered by Congress, for over 75 years.
II.
The Supreme Court first squarely addressed the President's constitutionally vested removal power in 1926.4  But once proved not enough. In the decades since, the Court has offered varying takes on the limits of that power—all apparently still good precedent. See Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, 561 U.S. 477, 483, 130 S. Ct. 3138, 177 L. Ed. 2d 706 (2010) ("The parties do not ask us to reexamine any of these precedents, and we do not do so."). Yet none of those precedents supports the novel limits on removal found in the Housing and Economic Recovery Act ("HERA"). Indeed, the lack of historical precedent to support HERA may be "the most telling indication of the severe constitutional problem" with it. Id. at 505 (quoting Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting  Oversight Board, 537 F.3d 667, 699, 383 U.S. App. D.C. 119 (D.C. Cir. 2008) (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting)).
A.
Let's start at the beginning. In Myers, the Court addressed "whether under the Constitution the President has the exclusive power of removing executive officers of the United States whom he has appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate." 272 U.S. at 60. The Court noted "[t]here is no express provision respecting removals in the Constitution." Id. at 109. But it did not stop there.
Instead, the Court considered the original meaning of the "executive power," the Decision of 1789, and the President's duties under the Take Care Clause. As to the original meaning of the "executive power," the Court noted that both the Congress constituted under the Articles of Confederation and the British crown exercised executive power, and that as a part of that power, both the Congress and the crown could appoint and remove executive officers. Id. at 110, 118. The Court's extensive discussion of the Decision of 1789, see id. at 111-63, underscored the importance of that Congress's constitutional deliberation and the ensuing "clear affirmative recognition of [the Decision of 1789] by each branch of the government," id. at 163. And Chief Justice Taft considered the duties of his former post. Speaking from experience,5  the Chief Justice explained that "when the grant of the executive power is enforced by the express mandate to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, it emphasizes the necessity for including within the executive power as conferred the exclusive power of removal." Id. at 122; see Jack Goldsmith & John F. Manning, The Protean Take Care Clause, 164 U. PA. L. REV. 1835, 1836 (2016) ("Chief Justice Taft invoked [the Take Care Clause] to hammer home the implication that a President charged with exercising all of the executive power must have the means to control subordinates through whom he or she would necessarily act[.]"). On this point, text, history, and structure all aligned:
The vesting of the executive power in the President was essentially a grant of the power to execute the laws. But the President alone and unaided could not execute the laws. He must execute them by the assistance of subordinates. . . . As he is charged specifically to take care that they be faithfully executed, the reasonable implication, even in the absence of express words, was that as part of his executive power he should select those who were to act for him under his direction in the execution of the laws. The further implication must be, in the absence of any express limitation respecting removals, that as his selection of administrative officers is essential to the execution of the laws by him, so must be his power of removing those for whom he cannot continue to be responsible. It was urged that the natural meaning of the term 'executive power' granted the President included the appointment and removal of executive subordinates. If such appointments and removals were not an exercise of the executive power, what were they? They certainly were not the exercise of legislative or judicial power in government as usually understood.
 Myers, 272 U.S. at 117-18 (citations omitted).
As the Court's opinion drew to a close, it returned to the Decision of 1789. The Court again emphasized that the first Congress "was a Congress whose constitutional decisions have always been regarded, as they should be regarded, as of the greatest weight in the interpretation of that fundamental instrument." Id. at 174-75. And because the Court "found [its] conclusion strongly favoring the view which prevailed in the First Congress," it "ha[d] no hesitation in holding that conclusion to be correct." Id. at 176. So the Court held "that the Tenure of Office Act of 1867, in so far as it attempted to prevent the President from removing executive officers who had been appointed by him by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, was invalid." Ibid.
Under Myers, this would be an easy case: Any limit on the President's power to remove a principal executive officer is unconstitutional.
Our dissenting colleagues brush Myers aside based on this factual distinction: Myers dealt with a statute requiring "the 'advice and consent of the Senate'" before the President could remove the officer, whereas HERA does not. Post, at 99 (Higginson, J.) (quoting Myers, 272 U.S. at 60). True enough. But it was not the character of the limitation on the President's removal power that led the Myers Court to reject it. Rather, it was the existence of any limitation at all—it was the denial of "the unrestricted power of removal" that the Court found invalid. 272 U.S. at 176. Myers held the removal power belongs to the President alone, and Congress cannot constrain it. Ibid. Under Myers, HERA's removal restriction is unconstitutional.
B.
Of course, Myers was not the last word on the nature of the President's removal power. In Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602, 55 S. Ct. 869, 79 L. Ed. 1611 (1935), the Supreme Court announced a different rule. The Humphrey's Executor Court maintained that Congress could not prevent the President from removing any (principal) officers exercising "purely" executive power. But it introduced the concept of administrative agencies that don't exercise executive power—a possibility Myers seemingly had not contemplated. See also Prakash, Decision of 1789, supra, at 1071 (arguing the Decision of 1789 did not resolve whether Congress could limit the President's removal power for non-executive officers). And for these non-executive administrative agencies, it approved greater restrictions on the President's removal power. Humphrey's Executor, 295 U.S. at 631-32.
The administrative agency at issue was the Federal Trade Commission. President Hoover appointed Humphrey as a Commissioner. Soon after his election in 1932, President Roosevelt removed Humphrey from office. Id. at 619. To his dying day, Humphrey maintained he was still a Commissioner. Ibid. Later, Humphrey's estate sued for his unpaid salary, claiming President Roosevelt lacked the power to remove an FTC Commissioner. Ibid. The estate pointed to the Federal Trade Commission Act, which provided that Commissioners would be appointed by the President, would serve for a certain term of years, and could be removed by the President "for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office." Id. at 620 (citing Federal Trade Commission Act, ch. 311, § 1, 38 Stat. 717, 718 (1914) (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. § 41)).
 President Roosevelt had cited no "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office" as cause for removing Humphrey. Id. at 620, 626. He simply wanted to appoint his own Commissioner with whom he "should have a full confidence." Id. at 620 (citing a letter from Roosevelt to Humphrey). Roosevelt's administration pointed to Myers. After all, Myers had recently confirmed that the Constitution grants the President unrestricted power to remove executive officers for any reason or no reason at all. See 272 U.S. at 176 (holding a statute that "attempted to prevent the President from removing executive officers who had been appointed by him . . . was invalid"). Roosevelt's administration argued that the Myers rule applied to the Federal Trade Commissioners, notwithstanding Congress's provision of a term of office and enumeration of causes justifying their removal. Humphrey's Executor, 295 U.S. at 626.
The Court disagreed. Relying on the FTCA's legislative history, it reasoned Congress had intended the FTC to function "wholly disconnected from the executive department." Id. at 630. The FTC was "to be nonpartisan; and it must, from the very nature of its duties, act with entire impartiality." Id. at 624. And the Court maintained that the FTC's "duties are neither political nor executive, but predominantly quasi judicial and quasi legislative." Ibid. Moreover, the Court had no "doubt[s]" about "[t]he authority of Congress" to create such agencies and "to require them to act in discharge of their duties independently of executive control." Id. at 629. "[T]hat authority includes, as an appropriate incident, power to fix the period during which the [officers] shall continue, and to forbid their removal except for cause in the meantime." Ibid. In short, Humphrey's Executor held that officials exercising quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial power could be insulated by for-cause-removal protection because of the need to keep such officials "independent" of the executive. Id. at 628. If an officer "exercises no part of the executive power vested by the Constitution in the President," it says, Congress can limit the President's removal power. Ibid. On the other hand, if the officer is "purely executive," Congress cannot limit that power. Id. at 631-32 (affirming the Myers rule for purely executive officers). Thus, the scope of the President's removal power "depend[s] upon the character of the office." Id. at 631.
Humphrey's Executor is difficult to apply for two reasons. First, its division between purely executive and quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial does not map neatly onto modern understandings of executive power. See Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 689 n.28, 108 S. Ct. 2597, 101 L. Ed. 2d 569 (1988) (discussing "[t]he difficulty of defining such categories of 'executive' or 'quasi-legislative' officials"); see also Bowsher, 478 U.S. at 762 n.3 (1986) (White, J., dissenting). And second, the Supreme Court itself limited Humphrey's Executor in Bowsher. There, the Comptroller General was subject to removal only by Congress and only for cause. See Bowsher, 478 U.S. at 727-28. The Court held this violated the Constitution's separation-of-powers principles by making an official exercising executive power subservient to the legislative branch. See id. at 726, 732-33. The Comptroller General's primary duty was to prepare a detailed report in accordance with a legislative mandate. Id. at 732. The Court held that this was an exercise of executive power: "Interpreting a law enacted by Congress to implement the legislative mandate is the very essence of 'execution' of the law." Id. at 733. That was so even though Congress "ha[d] consistently  viewed the Comptroller General as an officer of the Legislative branch." Id. at 731. And in reaching its conclusion, the Court pointed to the Decision of 1789 as "provid[ing] contemporaneous and weighty evidence of the Constitution's meaning since many of the Members of the First Congress had taken part in framing that instrument." Id. at 723-24.
Given that Bowsher turned on Congress's control over the executive officer in question—a problem undisputedly not at issue here—the dissenters are tempted to ignore Bowsher as irrelevant. Post, at 99 (Higginson, J.). But Bowsher is highly relevant in the way it cabins Humphrey's Executor. After Bowsher, Congress cannot legislate around the nature of executive power by creating an office that reports to another branch, rather than (or in addition to) reporting solely to the Executive Branch. See 478 U.S. at 731-32; cf. Humphrey's Executor, 295 U.S. at 628 (reasoning the FTC is not an executive agency because it was "created by Congress to carry into effect legislative policies . . . in accordance with the legislative standard . . . and to perform other specified duties as a legislative or as a judicial aid").
So what does Humphrey's Executor by way of Bowsher mean here? Well, the Federal Housing Finance Agency ("FHFA") Director obviously exercises executive power. As relevant to this case, FHFA implemented a statute—HERA—by making factual findings that triggered authorization to take over and operate the Government Sponsored Entities ("GSEs"). That's an executive act. Cf. Gundy v. United States, 139 S. Ct. 2116, 2140, 204 L. Ed. 2d 522 (2019) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (explaining that "condition[ing]" the application of statutes "on fact-finding" by the executive has been "long associated with the executive function"); Department of Transportation v. Association of American Railroads, 135 S. Ct. 1225, 1247 (2015) (Thomas, J., concurring in the judgment) (explaining that "conditional legislation does not seem to call on the President to exercise . . . legislative power" even though it makes the suspension or operation of statutory provisions "depend upon the action of the President based upon the occurrence of subsequent events, or the ascertainment by him of certain facts"); Bushnell v. Leland, 164 U.S. 684, 685, 17 S. Ct. 209, 41 L. Ed. 598 (1897) (rejecting the argument that "empowering [the comptroller] either to appoint a receiver or to make a ratable call upon the stockholders, is tantamount to vesting that officer with judicial power, in violation of the constitution"). Operating the GSEs in accordance with statutory directives is also executive. After all, "implement[ing] the legislative mandate is the very essence of 'execution' of the law." Bowsher, 478 U.S. at 733.
True, FHFA also has powers that might seem quasi-legislative. For example, it can promulgate regulations. See, e.g., 12 U.S.C. §§ 4536, 4617(i)(8). But having that power cannot be enough to render an agency quasi-legislative for purposes of Humphrey's Executor. If it were, nearly every member of the President's cabinet would be a quasi-legislative official and could be given for-cause removal protection. And that can't be. See Morrison, 487 U.S. at 690 ("Myers was undoubtedly correct in its holding, and in its broader suggestion that there are some 'purely executive' officials who must be removable by the President at will if he is to be able to accomplish his constitutional role."). But wherever you draw the line between "executive" and "quasi-legislative" power, the exercise of power at the heart of this  case is executive.6  FHFA executed a contract and enforced its terms; that is the heartland of executive power. See also Part II.E, infra. In deciding this case or controversy, our constitutional analysis should focus on the nature of the agency action being challenged—not the agency's power in the abstract. Thus, in relevant part, "the character of the office" held by the FHFA Director is executive. Humphrey's Executor, 295 U.S. at 631. Again, the for-cause removal restriction is invalid.7 
C.
In Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 108 S. Ct. 2597, 101 L. Ed. 2d 569 (1988), the Supreme Court arranged the removal precedents around a new organizing principle: Removal restrictions cannot unduly interfere with the President's fulfillment of his constitutional obligations—including the power to take care that the laws be faithfully executed. Morrison involved the Ethics in Government Act's provision for the appointment of an independent counsel to "investigate, and, if appropriate, prosecute certain high-ranking Government officials for violations of federal criminal laws." Id. at 660 (discussing 28 U.S.C. §§ 591-99). The independent counsel, once appointed, could only be removed "by the personal action of the Attorney General and only for cause." Id. at 663 (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 596(a)(1)).
There was "no real dispute that the functions performed by the independent counsel are 'executive' in the sense that they are law enforcement functions that typically have been undertaken by officials within the Executive Branch." Id. at 691. But the Morrison majority treated the categories used in Humphrey's Executor (executive vs. quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial) as relevant but not dispositive. We agree with our dissenting colleagues on this point: "Morrison downgraded Wiener's and Humphrey's Executor's inquiries from a determinative to a subsidiary level." See post, at 106 (Higginson, J.).
The Morrison Court instead concluded that the constitutionality of limitations on the President's removal power is not "define[d] [by] rigid categories of those officials who may or may not be removed at will by the President, but" aims to "ensure that Congress does not interfere with the President's exercise of the 'executive power' and his constitutionally appointed duty to 'take care that the laws be faithfully executed' under Article II." Morrison, 487 U.S. at 689-90. So, under Morrison, removal restrictions that do not limit "the President's ability to perform his constitutional duty" are permissible. Id. at 690.
 The Morrison Court concluded the independent counsel's office survives this test. First, the Court deemed the independent counsel an inferior office "with limited jurisdiction and tenure and lacking policymaking or significant administrative authority." Id. at 691; see also id. at 671-72. Second, the Court noted that the President retained the ability to remove the independent counsel for cause (through the Attorney General). Id. at 692-93; see also id. at 696. Congress limited the removal power "to establish the necessary independence of the office," the Court concluded. Id. at 693. And in light of the independent counsel's status as an inferior officer accountable to the Attorney General, such a limitation didn't unduly "interfere" with the President's constitutional duties. Ibid.
So what of the FHFA Director? Like the independent counsel, the FHFA Director exercises the executive power of implementing the laws. See Part II.B, supra. But unlike the independent counsel, the FHFA Director is a principal officer with significant authority, and he is not subject to significant presidential control through any other executive officer. FHFA's insulation from the ordinary appropriations process means its Director does not even answer to Congress. Cf. Humphrey's Executor, 295 U.S. at 628 (explaining the FTC is quasi-legislative because it acts "in aid of the legislative power" where it makes "investigations and reports . . . for the information of Congress"). And that also deprives the President of the control he exercises over most independent agencies, who "must participate in the annual budget cycle" under the oversight of the Office of Management and Budget.8  Perhaps it's true that "[n]o man is an island." John Donne, Devotions Upon Emergent Occasions, Meditation XVII 108 (Ann Arbor Paperback ed., 1959) (1624). But FHFA's Director comes pretty close.
To satisfy Morrison, "the Executive Branch" must have "sufficient control over" the independent officer "to ensure that the President is able to perform his constitutionally assigned duties." 487 U.S. at 696. Here, it's not clear the Executive Branch has any control at all.
D.
In Free Enterprise Fund, the Supreme Court made clear that Morrison only extends so far. The Free Enterprise Fund Court dealt with the members of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board ("PCAOB") who could be removed only by the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). 561 U.S. at 483. The PCAOB board members could only be removed by the SEC for cause, and the members of the SEC are principal officers who can only be removed by the President for cause. Id. at 486-87. The Court concluded this double for-cause protection arrangement violates the Constitution:
This novel structure does not merely add to the Board's independence, but transforms it. Neither the President, nor anyone directly responsible to him, nor even an officer whose conduct he may review only for good cause, has full control over the Board.
Id. at 496. So the Court found PCAOB Commissioners could not  constitutionally exercise executive power. See ibid.
The Court reaffirmed its focus on the importance of the relevant office by distinguishing principal officers from inferior officers and inferior officers from mere employees. Id. at 506 ("We do not decide the status of other Government employees, nor do we decide whether 'lesser functionaries subordinate to officers of the United States' must be subject to the same sort of control as those who exercise 'significant authority pursuant to the laws.'"). Thus, the above analysis concerning the status of a principal officer under Morrison applies here in much the same way.
But Free Enterprise Fund also emphasized a suspicion of novel agency structures. Before the case came before the Supreme Court, then-Judge Kavanaugh had dissented from the D.C. Circuit's opinion upholding the PCAOB:
Humphrey's Executor and Morrison represent what up to now have been the outermost constitutional limits of permissible congressional restrictions on the President's removal power. Therefore, given a choice between drawing the line at the holdings in Humphrey's Executor and Morrison or extending those cases to authorize novel structures such as the PCAOB that further attenuate the President's control over executive officers, we should opt for the former. We should resolve questions about the scope of those precedents in light of and in the direction of the constitutional text and constitutional history. In this case, that sensible principle dictates that we hold the line and not allow encroachments on the President's removal power beyond what Humphrey's Executor and Morrison already permit.
Free Enterprise Fund, 537 F.3d at 698 (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting) (citations omitted). The Supreme Court shared his concern: "Perhaps the most telling indication of the severe constitutional problem with the PCAOB is the lack of historical precedent for this entity." Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. at 505 (quoting 537 F.3d at 699 (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting)).
The novel agency structure at issue in this case raises similar suspicions. Granting that the protections here are not a "Matryoshka doll of tenure protections," id. at 497, Congress nevertheless insulated the FHFA Director in an unprecedented way. The FHFA Director is a principal officer, not an inferior one or an employee; he exercises significant executive authority; and he does so by himself, not as part of a multi-member body. Cf. PHH Corp. v. CFPB, 881 F.3d 75, 198, 434 U.S. App. D.C. 98 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (en banc) (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting) (noting that another agency's "single-Director structure departs from settled historical practice, threatens individual liberty, and diminishes the President's Article II authority to exercise the executive power.").9  HERA thereby grants "executive power without the Executive's oversight" and "subverts the President's ability to ensure that the laws are faithfully executed." Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. at 498.  Thus, FHFA fails under Free Enterprise Fund too.
E.
Judge Higginson's principal response to all of this is that "FHFA's conservatorship function" is "a role one would be hard-pressed to characterize as near the heart of executive power." Post, at 107. We disagree. To our minds, you'd be hard-pressed to characterize it as anything other than executive power.
"The executive power" vested by Article II, Section 1, is the power of "enforcing the laws." 1 Blackstone's Commentaries, supra, at *146. At the Founding, the "executive power" was understood in contradistinction to the "legislative" power of "making the laws." Ibid.; see also id. at *261; Matthew Hale, The Prerogatives of the King 176 (D.E.C. Yale ed. 1976). Without an executive to enforce, administer, or otherwise execute the law, legislation was a mere parchment barrier: "[T]he Vigour of the Laws consists in their Executive Power; Ten thousand Acts of Parliament signify no more than One Single Proclamation, unless the Gentlemen, in whose hands the Execution of those Laws is placed, take care to see them duly made use of . . . ." Daniel Defoe, the Poor Man's Plea 23 (2d ed. 1693). Thus, the power to execute the law is the power to follow a legislative instruction and "transform [legislative] intentions into reality." Julian Davis Mortensen, Article II Vests the Executive Power, Not the Royal Prerogative, 119 Colum. L. Rev. 1169, 1236 (2019).
There can be no doubt that FHFA purported to "execute" HERA here—even if it did so unlawfully. See ante, at 50-52 (Willett, J.). It "made use of" the statute to adopt the Third Amendment. And it made use of the statute (and the Third Amendment) to sweep the GSEs' profits. That plainly constitutes "the executive power."
But suppose we're wrong that FHFA is an executive branch agency—where would you put it instead? FHFA is an agency of the federal government. See 12 U.S.C. § 4511(a) (establishing FHFA as "an independent agency of the Federal Government"); id. § 4617(b)(2)(J)(ii) (granting FHFA power to "take any action authorized by this section, which the Agency determines is in the best interests of . . . the Agency"). Surely Judge Higginson does not mean to suggest FHFA is exercising "legislative or judicial power in government as usually understood." Myers, 272 U.S. at 117-18.
It's irrelevant that the Secretary of the Treasury—the other party to the Net Worth Sweep—could veto the deal. Cf. post, at 105 (Higginson, J.); post, at 112-13 (Costa, J.). It has never been true that setting aside an officer's action in a case involving the removal power requires proof that an uninsulated officer would not have taken the challenged action. Such counterfactual causation is alien to the Supreme Court's interpretation of Article II. Neither appointment cases nor removal cases require it. See Landry v. FDIC, 204 F.3d 1125, 1131, 340 U.S. App. D.C. 237 (D.C. Cir. 2000) ("There is certainly no rule that a party claiming constitutional error in the vesting of authority must show a direct causal link between the error and the authority's adverse decision.").10 
 Take Free Enterprise Fund, for example. That case implicated both appointment and removal. As to the former, the Court refused to require counterfactual causation as an element of standing to bring an appointment claim. 561 U.S. at 512 n.12 ("[S]tanding does not require precise proof of what the Board's policies might have been in that counterfactual world."). And as to the latter, the Court likewise rejected counterfactual causation. The Court granted prospective relief requiring officers to be properly removable before exercising executive authority. Id. at 513. And it did so without analyzing whether less-insulated officers would make different decisions than the unconstitutionally insulated officers did. If a plaintiff must show that a removable officer would make a different decision, then Free Enterprise Fund would not have granted relief without considering whether a more accountable officer would make different decisions.
Or take NLRB v. Noel Canning, 573 U.S. 513, 134 S. Ct. 2550, 189 L. Ed. 2d 538 (2014). By the time that case reached the Supreme Court, the NLRB already had new, validly appointed members. There was no evidence the new Board members were inclined to overturn the actions of the old, unconstitutionally appointed members. In fact, the litigants challenging the appointments told the Supreme Court that "going forward the government can solve the problem through agency ratification of past decisions." Transcript of Oral Argument at 66, Noel Canning, 573 U.S. 513 (No. 12-1281). Nevertheless, the Court invalidated the old members' decisions. See Noel Canning, 573 U.S. at 522 ("[T]hat the Board now unquestionably has a quorum does not moot the controversy about the validity of the previously entered Board order.").
The best support we can find for counterfactual causation is in the Bowsher dissent. It argued the unconstitutional removal provision was "unlikely to be" invoked, meaning in "political realit[y]" the officer's decision-making was unaffected. 478 U.S. at 730 (discussing Justice White's dissent). But the majority rejected that analysis: "The separated powers of our Government cannot be permitted to turn on judicial assessment of whether an officer exercising executive power is" likely to be fired. Ibid. "The Framers did not rest our liberties on such bureaucratic minutiae." Free Enterprise Fund, 561 U.S. at 500. Thus, there is no reason for us to speculate about what a more-accountable officer would have thought about the Net Worth Sweep. And the Treasury Secretary's agreement to the Net Worth Sweep doesn't tell us anything about the propriety of insulating the FHFA Director.
III.
A majority of our Court believes that the appropriate remedy for the constitutional  violation is to delete the offending statutory text. We respectfully disagree, because we do not think our limited Article III power to decide cases and controversies permits such a remedy.
The judicial power vested by Article III of the Constitution extends to "Cases" and "Controversies." U.S. Const. art. III, § 2, cl. 1. It generally does not include the legislative power to erase, rewrite, or otherwise "strike down" statutes: "[U]nder our constitutional system courts are not roving commissions assigned to pass judgment on the validity of the Nation's laws." Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 610-11, 93 S. Ct. 2908, 37 L. Ed. 2d 830 (1973). Rather, "[c]onstitutional judgments, as Mr. Chief Justice Marshall recognized, are justified only out of the necessity of adjudicating rights in particular cases between the litigants brought before the Court." Ibid. (citing Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 178, 2 L. Ed. 60 (1803)); see also United States v. Godoy, 890 F.3d 531, 539-40 (5th Cir. 2018) (explaining that the Supreme Court's declining to apply an unlawful statutory provision does not purge that provision from existence).
When then-Judge Scalia was sitting as a member of the three-judge district court in Synar v. United States, he recognized the importance of choosing a remedy that redresses the plaintiffs' injury-in-fact. See Synar v. United States, 626 F. Supp. 1374, 1393 (D.D.C.) (per curiam), aff'd sub nom. Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714, 106 S. Ct. 3181, 92 L. Ed. 2d 583 (1986). In that case, the constitutional violation was caused by a "combination" of statutes: one authorizing an officer to exercise executive power and another governing the appointment or removal of the officer in question. Ibid. Justice Scalia was faced with the question: Which statute should the court refuse to apply when either one would be constitutional in isolation? His answer was the statute that "allegedly authorizes the injury-in-fact that confers standing upon the plaintiff." Ibid. (synthesizing numerous Supreme Court precedents). Because the injury-in-fact in that case was caused by the statutory grant of executive power, that grant had to "yield." Id. at 1393-94.
In this case, Plaintiffs are injured by the Net Worth Sweep—an exercise of executive power unconstitutionally granted by HERA. Plaintiffs lost the value of their investments because FHFA used the Net Worth Sweep to transfer their money to the Treasury. They ask us to "[v]acat[e] and set[] aside the [contract's] Net Worth Sweep" provision. Our Article III powers permit us to grant this remedy, as it would redress Plaintiffs' injury-in-fact. Such a remedy finds support in precedent. See, e.g., Noel Canning v. NLRB, 705 F.3d 490, 493, 514-15, 403 U.S. App. D.C. 350 (D.C. Cir. 2013), aff'd, 573 U.S. 513, 134 S. Ct. 2550, 189 L. Ed. 2d 538 (2014) (vacating the NLRB's order because the Board was unconstitutionally constituted); see also Dresser-Rand Co. v. NLRB, 576 F. App'x 332, 333-34 (5th Cir. 2014) (vacating Board's order that was issued by only two lawfully appointed members).
Instead of granting this remedy, a majority of our Court charts a different path. They seek to blue-pencil the statute by deleting the unconstitutional statutory provision. Such a remedy is improper for two reasons.
First, it affords Plaintiffs no relief whatsoever. On these facts, editing the statute would not resolve any case or controversy. Plaintiffs do not complain about the possibility of future regulatory activity. Instead, they complain only about a past decision made by the FHFA Director: contractually agreeing to the Net Worth Sweep. A complaint based solely on past violations cannot justify prospective relief ordering an agency to disregard a statutory provision going forward. In a case seeking redress  for past harms such as this one, prospective relief is no relief at all. Cf. Lucia v. SEC, 138 S. Ct. 2044, 2055 n.5, 201 L. Ed. 2d 464 (2018) (explaining that Appointments Clause remedies should be designed to preserve the separation of powers and "to create '[]incentive[s] to raise Appointments Clause challenges'" (quoting Ryder v. United States, 515 U.S. 177, 183, 115 S. Ct. 2031, 132 L. Ed. 2d 136 (1995)).
Free Enterprise Fund is the principal precedent for the majority's blue-pencil remedy. But there, the plaintiffs sought an injunction against future audits and investigations by the unconstitutionally insulated agency. To remedy the plaintiffs' prospective injury-in-fact, the Court refused to apply the statute insulating the officers from removal. See 561 U.S. at 508-10. The Court recognized that the statutory provision was "only one of a number of statutory provisions that, working together, produce a constitutional violation." Id. at 509. In refusing to apply the for-cause protection provision that insulated the PCAOB commissioners from removal, it applied the most modest remedy it could to redress the plaintiffs' injuries. Thus, the Free Enterprise Fund remedy was effectively an injunction ordering the agency to disregard the second layer of for-cause removal protection going forward, unless and until Congress chose to fix the constitutional violation in a different way. In this case, Plaintiffs did not complain about the threat of future harm, so blue-penciling the statute would not redress any injury they have alleged.
Strangely, our colleagues who argue that Plaintiffs lack standing to bring their constitutional claim also join a majority of the Court in endorsing a blue-penciling remedy. Nowhere in their opinion do they explain how our Court could purport to delete a statutory provision when there is no active case or controversy within the meaning of Article III. We think Plaintiffs do have standing, yet we cannot identify how deleting the FHFA Director's removal protection would redress any harm Plaintiffs have alleged. On what basis could our colleagues possibly believe that a blue-penciling remedy is constitutionally permissible? We can see none.
The second problem we have with the remedy endorsed by a majority of our Court is that we do not believe Article III of the Constitution permits us to "strike" the FHFA Director's for-cause protection from the statute. See Murphy v. NCAA, 138 S. Ct. 1461, 1485, 200 L. Ed. 2d 854 (2018) (Thomas, J., concurring) (explaining that "[e]arly American courts did not have a severability doctrine" because "[t]hey recognized that the judicial power is, fundamentally, the power to render judgments in individual cases"); Jonathan F. Mitchell, The Writ-of-Erasure Fallacy, 104 VA. L. REV. 933, 936 (2018) (explaining "federal courts have no authority to erase a duly enacted law from the statute books" but have only the power "to decline to enforce a statute in a particular case or controversy" and "to enjoin executive officials from taking steps to enforce a statute"); Kevin C. Walsh, Partial Unconstitutionality, 85 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 738, 756 (2010) (explaining that the Founders did not conceive of judicial review as the power to "strike down" legislation).
At the Constitutional Convention, several delegates, including James Wilson and James Madison, argued for a "Council of Revision" comprised of federal judges and the executive. Mitchell, supra, at 954. The Council would have had the power to veto legislation passed by Congress, subject to congressional override. Ibid. A veto of legislation would render it "void," without any legal effect. Ibid. That proposal was defeated at the Convention on June 4, 1787.  Id. at 957. Wilson and Madison tried again on July 21, but again they were defeated. Id. at 958. Finally, on August 15, they made one last attempt to give the judiciary a veto over federal legislation, proposing that the Supreme Court be given the power to veto legislation independent of the President, subject to congressional override. Id. at 958-59. Again, they were defeated. Id. at 959.
In the final Constitution, the judiciary was given only the power to decide cases and controversies—to resolve legal disputes between parties and order remedies to redress injuries. Thus, when a court concludes that a statute is unconstitutional, it is not "striking down" or "voiding" or "invalidating" the law. It is merely holding that the law may not be applied to the parties in the dispute. The Constitution does not empower courts to delete sections of state and federal codes. The Founders expressly considered the possibility of a judicial veto, and they rejected it multiple times during the Constitutional Convention.
This history has been obscured by rhetoric that Chief Justice Marshall used in Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 2 L. Ed. 60 (1803), to explain judicial review. In that case he famously declared that a statute found unconstitutional by a court becomes "entirely void," "invalid," and "not law." Id. at 177-78. Subsequent cases have compounded the confusion. See, e.g., The Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 26, 3 S. Ct. 18, 27 L. Ed. 835 (1883) (holding "void" sections 1 and 2 of the Civil Rights Act of 1875). Nevertheless, it is indisputable that courts do not have the power to erase duly enacted statutes. Instead, they may decline to enforce them or enjoin their future enforcement to resolve cases and controversies.
Our Court should not add to the confusion about the judiciary's limited powers by claiming to "sever" a statute based on open-ended speculation about how Congress would have solved the separation-of-powers problem. And we certainly should not rewrite the statute while pretending such legislative activity is the most modest judicial remedy. We would instead remand to the district court with instructions to fashion a remedy that actually redresses Plaintiffs' harms.
* * *
Whether we apply the Constitution's original public meaning, Myers, Humphrey's Executor, Morrison, or Free Enterprise Fund, the conclusion in this case is the same. The FHFA Director cannot exercise the executive power of the United States because he is unconstitutionally insulated from presidential control and accountability. And our Court does not have the power under Article III to order a remedy that does not redress Plaintiffs' injuries.
HAYNES