
The court today remands this case for further proceedings against Michael Hatten, the medical administrator at South Mississippi Correctional Institution, where Thad Delaughter is currently serving his sentence. I write separately to draw attention to Hatten's unopposed motion to supplement the record with additional medical records, which the court today denies. Unless the medical records are somehow discredited, they would appear to undercut Delaughter's claims of unjustified delay or outright denial of medically necessary surgery. It is with the understanding and  belief that these medical records can and will be explored on remand that I concur in the judgment.
Hatten submits medical records concerning physician visits that occurred after final judgment was entered in this case on March 18, 2016. Joined by the State of Mississippi, Hatten contends, with some force, that these medical records "directly rebut Delaughter's contention that he is being denied hip replacement surgery due to Defendants-Appellees' refusal to pay for the surgery."
Delaughter indicated in a handwritten response that he "does not object to the Appellees' Motion to Supplement the Record." Nor does he dispute the authenticity of the supplemental medical records.
Hatten's motion explains that, on April 5, 2016, "his treating doctors were ready to proceed ahead with hip replacement surgery, but were forced to postpone surgery because Delaughter admitted he had recently smoked marijuana." Delaughter does not dispute this. And the supplemental medical records confirm it. The records from his physician consultation on April 5, 2016, state that Delaughter was advised that "he needs to be completely drug and nicotine free prior to us proceeding," and that he "openly admits to using marijuana." So it appears by all accounts that Delaughter's own conduct prevented him from receiving the treatment he seeks, at least as of April 2016, the month that he filed notice of this appeal.
In addition, Delaughter's medical records further indicate that, on January 5, 2017, he informed his physician that he has "[n]o acute issues/complaints," and that furthermore, he "expects to be released in the next 5 years if all goes as planned." This is significant because it appears that Delaughter agreed to postpone any surgery until after his anticipated release. As the medical records from his physician consultation on January 5, 2017, explain:
We discussed the severe complexity of his issues with the patient. This would require a large reconstruction which would have significant intraoperative and postoperative risks. Given his current incarceration, he would likely not be able to receive the ideal postoperative care or likely any postoperative therapy. In light of this being a chronic issue, we discussed the need for delaying any operative intervention until he is released from prison. . . . He understood the need to wait until he is released from prison to maximize his chances of recovery. We encouraged him to remain drug and nicotine free in order to receive operative intervention. Patient understood and agreed with treatment plan going forward. He will follow up with us when he is released from prison.
Delaughter does not contend that these medical reports are false or fraudulent. Indeed, Delaughter offers no explanation whatsoever, other than to state that the information contained in his medical records is "puzzling" because he has "twelve more years to serve."
If it is true that Delaughter is the cause of his own delays—indeed, if it is true that he has consented to postponing surgery until after his release—it is difficult to see how he can prevail on his claim for injunctive relief and damages for pain and suffering. These issues can and should be explored further on remand. I concur in the judgment.

 

