
If we were limited to the statutes enacted by Congress, as our Founders understood the Constitution to require, I would have voted with the majority. But we are also bound by regulations issued by the Department of Labor, and because I read those differently from the majority, I respectfully dissent.
The Constitution vests "[a]ll legislative powers herein granted" in Congress. U.S. CONST. art. I, § 1. So the power to impose rules restricting liberty rests exclusively in Congress. As Justice Gorsuch recently wrote, joined by the Chief Justice and Justice Thomas: "The Constitution promises that only the people's elected representatives may adopt new federal laws restricting liberty," and "[n]o one, not even Congress, ha[s] the right to alter that arrangement." Gundy v. United States, 139 S. Ct. 2116, 2131, 2133, 204 L. Ed. 2d 522 (2019) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting)  (emphasis added). Our Founders' reasoning was simple: "They believed the new federal government's most dangerous power was the power to enact laws restricting the people's liberty. An 'excess of law-making' was, in their words, one of 'the diseases to which our governments are most liable.'" Id. at 2134 (quoting THE FEDERALIST No. 62 (James Madison)).
This understanding of the legislative power has lain dormant for nearly a century. But four members of the Supreme Court have recently expressed interest in breathing life back into the doctrine. See id. at 2130-31 (Alito, J., concurring); id. at 2131-43 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting). See also DOT v. Ass'n of Am. R.R., 575 U.S. 43, 135 S. Ct. 1225, 1242, 191 L. Ed. 2d 153 (2015) (Thomas, J., concurring) ("The function at issue here is the formulation of generally applicable rules of private conduct. Under the original understanding of the Constitution, that function requires the exercise of legislative power."); Whitman v. Am. Trucking Ass'ns, 531 U.S. 457, 487, 121 S. Ct. 903, 149 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2001) (Thomas, J., concurring).
This case provides one modest illustration of how restoring the Founders' vision can affect how we decide cases.
If we were looking only at statutes enacted by Congress, I would join my colleagues in affirming the district court, because it seems obvious that Jeff Faludi was "employed in a bona fide . . . professional capacity" and therefore exempt from the overtime requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act. 29 U.S.C. § 213(a)(1).
But Congress has delegated to the Secretary of Labor the power to both "define[] and delimit[]" the scope of the professional exception, and thereby determine who shall and shall not be subject to federal overtime rules. Id. And under my best reading of the relevant Labor Department regulations, I part company with my colleagues.
That is because the method by which U.S. Shale compensates Faludi does not satisfy the "salary-basis" test set forth by the Secretary:
An employee will be considered to be paid on a "salary basis" within the meaning of these regulations if the employee regularly receives each pay period on a weekly, or less frequent basis, a predetermined amount constituting all or part of the employee's compensation, which amount is not subject to reduction because of variations in the quality or quantity of the work performed. Subject to the exceptions provided in paragraph (b) of this section, an exempt employee must receive the full salary for any week in which the employee performs any work without regard to the number of days or hours worked.
29 C.F.R. § 541.602(a) (emphases added).
As the majority correctly notes, U.S. Shale paid Faludi on a daily, not weekly, rate. Faludi did not "regularly receive" a "predetermined amount" on a weekly basis. Instead, his pay depended on the number of days he worked.
U.S. Shale creatively argues that Faludi's daily rate of $1,000 can be recharacterized as a weekly rate of at least $1,000, so long as he works at least one day a week. But that does not alter the fact that Faludi receives a "predetermined amount" on a daily basis, and not "on a weekly, or less frequent basis." Nor can I reconcile U.S. Shale's theory with the requirement that "an exempt employee must receive the full salary for any week in which the employee performs any work without regard to the number of days or hours worked." Id. (emphases added).
 My reading of 29 C.F.R. § 541.602(a) is bolstered by 29 C.F.R. § 541.604(b), which provides:
An exempt employee's earnings may be computed on . . . a daily. . . basis, without . . . violating the salary basis requirement, ifthe employment arrangement also includes a guarantee of at least the minimum weekly required amount paid on a salary basis regardless of the number of hours, days or shifts worked, anda reasonable relationship exists between the guaranteed amount and the amount actually earned.
29 C.F.R. § 541.604(b). See also Hughes v. Gulf Interstate Field Servs, Inc., 878 F.3d 183, 189 (6th Cir. 2017) (relying on 29 C.F.R. § 541.604(b) because "[t]he text of § 541.602(a) does not tell us what to do when an employee's salary is not clearly calculated 'on a weekly, or less frequent basis'").
According to U.S. Shale, the "guaranteed" "weekly required amount" is $1,000. But that weekly guarantee does not have a "reasonable relationship" with Faludi's total compensation of approximately $260,000, as the regulations make clear. See 29 C.F.R. § 541.604(b) ("The reasonable relationship test will be met if the weekly guarantee is roughly equivalent to the employee's usual earnings at the assigned hourly, daily or shift rate for the employee's normal scheduled workweek. Thus, for example, if the weekly salary level is $913, an exempt employee guaranteed compensation of at least $1,000 for any week in which the employee performs any work, and who normally works four or five shifts each week, may be paid $300 per shift without violating the salary basis requirement.").
Accordingly, I would reverse and remand for further proceedings, to allow the district court to address in the first instance whether Faludi is an independent contractor and therefore not entitled to overtime.
* * *
Under the Constitution, the people have the right to fire those who make the law. "[B]y directing that legislating be done only by elected representatives in a public process, the Constitution sought to ensure that the lines of accountability would be clear: The sovereign people would know, without ambiguity, whom to hold accountable for the laws they would have to follow." Gundy, 139 S. Ct. at 2134 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (citations omitted). See also id. at 2133-34 ("'[N]or can the people be bound by any laws but such as are enacted by those whom they have chosen and authorised to make laws for them.'") (quoting JOHN LOCKE, THE SECOND TREATISE OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT AND A LETTER CONCERNING TOLERATION § 141).
That vision is eviscerated when the legislative power is exercised, not by duly elected members of Congress, but by Executive Branch officials who, once appointed, are effectively untouchable by the people.1 
Perhaps the Supreme Court will someday revive the nondelegation doctrine and restore the Founders' vision of the Constitution.2  But until then, I agree with the majority that we are duty-bound to follow Labor Department regulations. We simply  disagree on the best reading of those regulations. For that reason, I respectfully dissent.

 

