
I disagree with the majority's opinion insofar as it reverses the district court's dismissal of IAS's fraudulent inducement claim.
"[F]raudulent inducement claims require plaintiff to prove a misrepresentation" and, among other things, "that defendant knew the representation was false and intended  to induce plaintiff to enter into the contract through that misrepresentation." Bohnsack v. Varco, L.P., 668 F.3d 262, 277 (5th Cir. 2012) (emphasis added). In my view, IAS has not pled its allegations with sufficient particularity. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b) ("In alleging fraud or mistake, a party must state with particularity the circumstances constituting fraud or mistake.").
First, Buckley's statement that JBA was QBE's "number one" vendor lacks sufficient context to be actionable. As we have previously observed: "A representation of fact can constitute actionable fraudulent inducement only if it (1) admits of being adjudged true or false in a way that (2) admits of empirical verification." Hoffman v. L & M Arts, 838 F.3d 568, 579 (5th Cir. 2016) (emphasis added, citation and quotations omitted).
IAS has not pleaded exactly what Buckley's "number one" statement was intended to communicate. Perhaps the metric Buckley was employing was something quite different from the "internal ranking" the majority invokes (the range of possibilities include total dollars spent, number of claims processed, quality or speed of service, client satisfaction, or yet some other metric). We do not know, and IAS does not tell us—it provides no explanation of any kind anywhere in its complaint. Accordingly, IAS has failed to plead with particularity that Buckley did indeed make a misrepresentation. See, e.g., Lone Star Fund V (U.S.), L.P. v. Barclays Bank PLC, 594 F.3d 383, 388 (5th Cir. 2010) (fraud claimants "must successfully allege . . . that the representations were false when made"); Williams v. WMX Techs., Inc., 112 F.3d 175, 177 (5th Cir. 1997) ("[A]rticulating the elements of fraud with particularity requires a plaintiff to specify the statements contended to be fraudulent, identify the speaker, state when and where the statements were made, and explain why the statements were fraudulent.") (emphasis added).
Second, IAS failed to plead that JBA's representations in the Asset Purchase Agreement were fraudulent. ¶2.3 of the Asset Purchase Agreement provides that
Neither the execution and delivery by the Seller, the Owner, or the Beneficial Owners of this Agreement and the other agreements contemplated hereby, nor the performance by the Seller, the Owner or the Beneficial Owners of their respective obligations under this agreement and such other agreements, nor the consummation by the Seller of the Purchase Transaction, will (a) violate or conflict with any provision of the Articles of Incorporation or Bylaws of the Seller, (b) violate any Law, Order, or other restriction to which the Seller, the Owner or the Beneficial Owners is subject, (c) require the Seller, the Owner or the Beneficial Owners to make any declaration to or registration or filing with, or obtain any consent or Permit from, any Governmental Authority, (d) result in any loss of any Permit related to the Business or (e) violate, conflict with, result in a breach of, constitute a default under, result in the acceleration of, create in any party the right to accelerate, terminate, modify or cancel, or require any authorization, consent, approval, execution or other action by, or notice to, any third party under, any Contract or any Encumbrance to which the Seller, the Owner or the Beneficial Owners is a party or by which such Person is bound or to which any of such Person's assets are subject, provided that the Parties acknowledge that consents of the landlords under the Lease Agreements (as defined in Section 1.5(b)(v)) to assignments of the Lease Agreements to Buyer have not been obtained on or prior to the Effective Time, and the Parties shall use their commercially reasonable efforts  after the Effective Time to obtain such consents.
As relevant here, ¶2.3 of the Agreement promised that "the consummationof the Purchase Transaction" did not "require" the "consent" of QBE (or anyone else)—and that the acquisition would not "violate, conflict with, [or] result in a breach of" JBA's contract with QBE (or anyone else).
JBA complied with this promise: JBA did not need QBE's consent for JBA to be acquired by IAS. Nor did the acquisition result in any breach or conflict with JBA's contract with QBE.
IAS is simply mistaken when it claims that ¶2.3 promises that all consents to assignment of third-party contracts—such as the JBA-QBE contract—had been obtained. Rather, ¶2.3 states only that no third party consent was required for IAS to purchase JBA.
To be sure, IAS is emphatic that the ability to maintain QBE's business was a central reason for its desire to acquire JBA in the first place. Put another way, QBE's consent to assignment of its contract with JBA was undoubtedly necessary to fulfill IAS's ambitions for the Purchase Transaction. But ¶2.3 does not promise that "the consummation of IAS's ambitions for the purchase transaction" would not require QBE's consent.
Nor did the acquisition result in any breach or conflict with JBA's contract with QBE. To be sure, consummation of the acquisition gave QBE the contractual right not to continue doing business with JBA. But that is not a breach or violation of JBA's contract with QBE. To the contrary, QBE always possessed the right to stop sending contracts to JBA at any time—the change of corporate ownership created no right that QBE did not already possess.
The bottom line is this: JBA never warranted that it had obtained QBE's consent to the JBA-IAS sale, because QBE's consent wasn't actually required for JBA to sell to IAS. QBE's consent was only required for reassignment of the contracts—the contracts IAS aspired to obtain by purchasing JBA. And nothing in ¶2.3 purports to represent that JBA made all the arrangements necessary for reassignment of the QBE contracts.
Hence, ¶2.3 was not a misrepresentation and could not have supported IAS's fraudulent inducement claim.
I concur in the majority's resolution of the remaining issues.

 

