
Nothing in the text or original understanding of the Constitution establishes a right to an abortion. Rather, what distinguishes abortion from other matters of health care policy in America—and uniquely removes abortion policy from the democratic process established by our Founders—is Supreme Court precedent. The parties and amici therefore draw our attention not to what the Constitution says, but to what the Supreme Court has held.1 
 A good faith reading of those precedents requires us to affirm. Tellingly, the able counsel who brought this appeal on behalf of the State of Mississippi did not even request oral argument, notwithstanding the high stakes for their clients—the constitutionality of a recent enactment of profound moral significance to the citizens of Mississippi. That omission makes no sense but for the fact that Supreme Court precedent requires affirmance.
I am nevertheless deeply troubled by how the district court handled this case. The opinion issued by the district court displays an alarming disrespect for the millions of Americans who believe that babies deserve legal protection during pregnancy as well as after birth, and that abortion is the immoral, tragic, and violent taking of innocent human life. Notably, the States of Texas and Louisiana devote the majority of their amicus brief to the unusual but unfortunately warranted request that we explicitly disapprove of the district court opinion.
The district court no doubt believes that its opinion faithfully reflects one side of the debate—the side that believes that abortion is a necessary component of a woman's personal autonomy. But the Supreme Court has made clear that both sides of the debate deserve respect. "Men and women of good conscience can disagree . . . about the profound moral and spiritual implications of terminating a pregnancy." Planned Parenthood of Se. Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 850, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 120 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1992). Countless Americans believe in good faith that abortion is "nothing short of an act of violence against innocent human life." Id. at 852. The majority in Casey even acknowledged that "[s]ome of us as individuals find abortion offensive to our most basic principles of morality." Id. at 850.
Instead of respecting all sides, the district court opinion disparages the Mississippi legislation as "pure gaslighting." It equates a belief in the sanctity of life with sexism, disregarding the millions of women who strongly oppose abortion. And, without a hint of irony, it smears Mississippi legislators by linking House Bill 1510 to the state's tragic history of race relations, while ignoring abortion's own checkered racial past.
Supreme Court precedent dictates abortion policy in America. So I am duty bound to affirm the judgment of the district court. But I cannot affirm the opinion of the district court.
I.
Like every other court to consider the issue, the majority concludes that Casey prohibits any and all bans on pre-viability abortions. See, e.g., Casey, 505 U.S. at 879 (plurality opinion) ("[A] State may not prohibit any woman from making the ultimate decision to terminate her pregnancy before viability."); see also Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124, 146, 127 S. Ct. 1610, 167 L. Ed. 2d 480 (2007).2  The majority therefore concludes that, as a ban  on abortions that Mississippi admits occur prior to viability, HB 1510 is inconsistent with Casey.
I am aware of no judicial opinion that reads Casey differently, and Mississippi and its amici provide none. To the contrary, Mississippi concedes that HB 1510 would be held unconstitutional in every circuit that has addressed such issues to date. I am forced to agree with the majority's application of Supreme Court precedent to this recently enacted and sincerely motivated law, and to conclude that we are duty bound to affirm the judgment.
For its part, Mississippi asserts various interests to justify the law. Among them, the State most vigorously presses its interest in avoiding pain to the unborn baby. To support that interest, Mississippi proffered the declaration of an expert, Dr. Maureen Condic, a professor of neurobiology at the University of Utah who specializes in the development and regeneration of the nervous system.
In her declaration, Dr. Condic explained that, based on current scientific evidence, "[d]uring the time period covered by [HB 1510], the human fetus is likely to be capable of conscious pain perception." She indicated that fetuses may be able to feel pain as early as ten weeks from the last menstrual period (LMP), when "[t]he neural circuitry responsible for the most primitive response to pain . . . is in place." At that point, the "fetus . . . actively withdraw[s] from . . . painful stimulus." That is consistent with the Legislature's finding that, "[a]t twelve weeks [LMP], an unborn human being . . . senses stimulation from the world outside the womb." Gestational Age Act, ch. 393, § 1(2)(b)(i)(6), 2018 Miss. Laws 606, 607.
Furthermore, Dr. Condic noted that it was "universally accepted" that a fetus has  a neural network "capable of pain perception" at some point "between [14-20] weeks" LMP. She then discussed various studies showing that fetuses physically respond to painful experiences, including "a recent review of the evidence" that "conclude[d] that from the [fifteenth week LMP] onward, 'the fetus is extremely sensitive to painful stimuli, and that this fact should be taken into account when performing invasive medical procedures on the fetus.'" Based on that evidence, Mississippi argues that nontherapeutic (that is, medically unnecessary) abortions after fifteen weeks LMP are "barbaric" and "brutal and inhumane" and, as such, undermine the State's interest in the life of the unborn child.3 
A State has an unquestionably legitimate (if not compelling) interest in preventing gratuitous pain to the unborn. Consider how the Supreme Court has construed the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause of the Eighth Amendment to forbid executions of convicted murderers that involve unnecessary pain. See Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35, 49, 128 S. Ct. 1520, 170 L. Ed. 2d 420 (2008) (plurality opinion) ("Our cases recognize that subjecting individuals to a risk of future harm—not simply actually inflicting pain—can qualify as cruel and unusual punishment."). It would be surprising if the Constitution requires States to use execution methods that avoid causing unnecessary pain to convicted murderers, but does not even permit them from preventing abortions that cause unnecessary pain to unborn babies.
Not surprisingly, then, members of the Supreme Court have acknowledged that avoidance of pain is indeed a valid state interest in the abortion context. Both Justice Blackmun and Justice Stevens have thought "it obvious that the State's interest in the protection of an embryo . . . increases progressively and dramatically as the organism's capacity to feel pain, to experience pleasure, to survive, and to react to its surroundings increases day by day." Webster v. Reprod. Health Servs., 492 U.S. 490, 552, 109 S. Ct. 3040, 106 L. Ed. 2d 410 (1989) (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (quoting Thornburgh v. Am. Coll. of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, 476 U.S. 747, 778, 106 S. Ct. 2169, 90 L. Ed. 2d 779 (1986) (Stevens, J., concurring)). See also id. at 569 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("There can be no interest in protecting the newly fertilized egg from physical pain or mental anguish, because the capacity for such suffering does not yet exist; respecting a developed fetus, however, that interest is valid.").
The State of Mississippi did not cite any of those authorities. That is presumably because, although Casey acknowledged  that "time has overtaken some of Roe's factual assumptions," and that further developments in science and medicine may warrant further legal change, the Court ultimately fixed the line at viability, not pain. 505 U.S. at 860.
Because Casey establishes viability as the governing constitutional standard, I am duty bound to conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion in forbidding discovery and fact development on the issue of pain. But neither would it have been an abuse of discretion if the district court had permitted discovery and fact development on the issue of pain.
As the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure state, discovery may be permitted for "any nonprivileged matter that is relevant to any party's claim or defense and proportional to the needs of the case, considering [inter alia] the importance of the issues at stake in the action." Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(b)(1). Relevance "encompass[es] any matter that bears on, or that could reasonably lead to other matter that could bear on, any issue that is or may be in the case." Oppenheimer Fund, Inc. v. Sanders, 437 U.S. 340, 351, 98 S. Ct. 2380, 57 L. Ed. 2d 253 (1978).
Notably, nothing in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure forecloses discovery based on a good faith expectation of legal change. To the contrary, the Rules expressly envision that parties may need to litigate in anticipation of such change. See, e.g., Fed. R. Civ. P. 11(b)(2) (permitting parties to make "claims, defenses, and other legal contentions . . . warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous argument for extending, modifying, or reversing existing law or for establishing new law"); Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(g)(1)(B)(i) (permitting "discovery request[s]" that are, inter alia, "warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous argument for extending, modifying, or reversing existing law, or for establishing new law"); Mount Hope Church v. Bash Back!, 705 F.3d 418, 425 (9th Cir. 2012) ("Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(g)(1)(B) requires parties seeking discovery to act . . . consistently with the rules of existing law or with good reason to change the law."); Builders Ass'n of Greater Chi. v. City of Chicago, 215 F.R.D. 550, 554 (N.D. Ill. 2003) (noting that a subpoena is unduly burdensome "if the information is wholly irrelevant under any reasonable legal theory," but not if it rests on "a basis for a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law").
Federal courts in other circuits have thus permitted, as well as denied, fact development on the issue of fetal pain. Compare Bryant v. Woodall, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53570, 2017 WL 1292378, at *7 (M.D.N.C. Apr. 7, 2017) (permitting discovery), with MKB Mgmt. Corp. v. Stenehjem, 795 F.3d 768, 773 n.4 (8th Cir. 2015) (affirming an "order limiting discovery to the issue of viability").
So nothing prevented the district court from allowing Mississippi to pursue discovery and to develop facts necessary to its defense—including for the purpose of arguing for a change in precedent on appeal. Indeed, that is what occurred in both the Kansas and Delaware trial court proceedings leading up to the Supreme Court's landmark ruling in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483, 74 S. Ct. 686, 98 L. Ed. 873 (1954).
Prior to Brown, two Supreme Court decisions—Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 16 S. Ct. 1138, 41 L. Ed. 256 (1896) and Gong Lum v. Rice, 275 U.S. 78, 48 S. Ct. 91, 72 L. Ed. 172 (1927)—governed the constitutionality of segregated primary and high schools. Brown v. Bd. of Educ. of Topeka, 98 F. Supp. 797, 800 (D. Kan. 1951). Under those precedents, any evidence that "segregation itself" would result in African American students "receiving inferior educational opportunities . . .  was immaterial to the [constitutional] conclusion." Gebhart v. Belton, 33 Del. Ch. 144, 91 A.2d 137, 153 (Del. 1952). Yet the trial courts in both Kansas and Delaware nevertheless made findings that segregated schools would result in "a feeling of inferiority" in African American students—in language that all but amounted to a direct challenge to then-governing Supreme Court precedent. See Brown, 347 U.S. at 494 & n.10 (quoting findings).
What's more, the Supreme Court credited those findings in Brown. The Court noted that "[t]he effect of [segregation on African American students] was well stated by a finding in the Kansas case by a court which nevertheless felt compelled to rule against the [African American] plaintiffs." Id. at 494. And it noted that "[a] similar finding was made in the Delaware case." Id. at 494 n.10 (quoting finding).
In sum, in the run-up to Brown, trial courts permitted fact development, considered the evidence, and even issued findings of fact on an issue that was legally irrelevant under then-governing Supreme Court precedent. Nothing prevented the district court from doing the same here.
The district court's unwillingness to follow the path of the trial courts in Brown may not be reversible error. But it is unfortunate. If courts grant convicted murderers the right to discovery to mitigate pain from executions, there's no reason they shouldn't be even more solicitous of innocent babies.4 
II.
Having invoked relevance to deny evidentiary development concerning fetal pain, the district court then ignored relevance to consider a wide range of historical matters entirely unconnected to the enactment of HB 1510 in order to impugn the motivations of citizens and policymakers who believe in the sanctity of life.
It is worth quoting the district court in full:
[T]his Court concludes that the Mississippi Legislature's professed interest in "women's health" is pure gaslighting. In its legislative findings justifying the need for this legislation, the Legislature cites Casey yet defies Casey's core holding. The State "ranks as the state with the most [medical] challenges for women, infants, and children" but is silent on expanding Medicaid. Ryan Sit, Mississippi has the Highest Infant Mortality Rate and is Expected to Pass the Nation's Strictest Abortion Bill, Newsweek, March 19, 2018. Its leaders are proud to challenge Roe but choose not to lift a finger to address the tragedies lurking on the other side of the delivery room: our alarming infant and maternal mortality rates. See, e.g., Lynn Evans, Maternal Deaths Still on the Increase, The Clarion Ledger, March 31, 2018; Danielle Paquette, Why Pregnant Women in Mississippi Keep Dying, Wash. Post, April 24, 2015.
No, legislation like H.B. 1510 is closer to the old Mississippi—the Mississippi bent on controlling women and minorities. The Mississippi that, just a few decades  ago, barred women from serving on juries "so they may continue their service as mothers, wives, and homemakers." State v. Hall, 187 So.2d 861, 863 (Miss. 1966). The Mississippi that, in Fannie Lou Hamer's reporting, sterilized six out of ten black women in Sunflower County at the local hospital—against their will. See Rickie Solinger, Wake Up Little Susie 57 (1992). And the Mississippi that, in the early 1980s, was the last State to ratify the 19th Amendment—the authority guaranteeing women the right to vote. See Marjorie Julian Spruill & Jesse Spruill Wheeler, Mississippi Women and the Woman Suffrage Movement, Mississippi History Now.
Jackson Women's Health Org. v. Currier, 349 F. Supp. 3d 536, 540 n.22 (S.D. Miss. 2018). The court went on:
The Mississippi Legislature has a history of disregarding the constitutional rights of its citizens. See, e.g., Alexander v. Holmes Cty. Bd. of Ed., 396 U.S. 19, 20, 90 S. Ct. 29, 24 L. Ed. 2d 19 (1969) (15 years after Brown v. Board, Mississippi continued to maintain segregated schools, prompting the Supreme Court to tell the State that it was "the obligation of every school district . . . to terminate dual school systems at once and to operate now and hereafter only unitary schools."); Campaign for Southern Equality v. Bryant, 791 F.3d 625, 627 (5th Cir. 2015) (striking down Mississippi's ban on same-sex marriage, explaining that "Obergefell, in both its Fourteenth and First Amendment iterations, is the law of the land and, consequently, the law of this circuit"); ACLU v. Fordice, 969 F. Supp. 403, 405 (S.D. Miss. 1994) (reciting how State legislature created and funded the Sovereignty Commission "to maintain racial segregation in the South despite orders to the contrary by the United States Supreme Court. As the secret intelligence arm of the State, the Commission engaged in a wide variety of unlawful activity"); Jackson Womens Health Organization v. Amy, 330 F. Supp. 2d 820 (S.D. Miss. 2004) (enjoining state statute that eliminated organization's ability to perform abortions early in second trimester); Campaign for Southern Equality v. Miss. Dep't of Hum. Serv., 175 F. Supp. 3d 691, 697 (S.D. Miss. 2016) (striking down Mississippi statute prohibiting adoption by married gay couples); Stewart v. Waller, 404 F. Supp. 206 (N.D. Miss. 1975) (striking down at-large alderman election statute as purposeful device conceived to violate the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments in furtherance of racial discrimination).
Id. at 543 n.40.
I find it deeply disquieting that a federal court would disparage the millions of Americans who believe in the sanctity of life as nothing more than "bent on controlling women and minorities" and "disregarding their rights as citizens." Those insults not only directly conflict with the Supreme Court's admonitions that both sides of the debate deserve respect—they are also demonstrably incorrect.
A.
Consider, for example, the district court's claim that it is sexist to believe in the protection of the unborn. The Supreme Court has articulated precisely the opposite sentiment: "Whatever one thinks of abortion, it cannot be denied that there are common and respectable reasons for opposing it, other than hatred of, or condescension toward (or indeed any view at all concerning), women as a class—as is evident from the fact that men and women are on both sides of the issue." Bray v.  Alexandria Women's Health Clinic, 506 U.S. 263, 270, 113 S. Ct. 753, 122 L. Ed. 2d 34 (1993). See also id. at 326 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (acknowledging that "many women oppose abortion"). "Men and women of good conscience can disagree . . . about the profound moral and spiritual implications of terminating a pregnancy." Casey, 505 U.S. at 850.5 
Moreover, according to a reputable survey of national opinion, more women than men describe themselves as "pro-life." Abortion Trends by Gender, https://news.gallup.com/poll/245618/abortion-trends-gender.aspx past Gallup, and present, view "abortion [as] part and parcel of women's oppression." (last visited Dec. 2, 2019) (noting that, in 2019, 51% of women and 46% of men in the United States self-identify as "pro-life"). Likewise, many feminists, both Mary Krane Derr & Linda Naranjo-Huebl, Prolife Feminism: Yesterday & Today 12 (Rachel MacNair ed. 1995). See also, e.g., id. at 5 ("[T]here is a motif in feminism which began long ago and has endured to the present day. This is the theme of abortion as an injustice against fetal life which originates with injustice against female life."); Brief Amici Curiae of Feminists for Life of America; Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc.; Pro-Life Legal Defense Fund, Inc.; and University Faculty for Life in Support of Petitioners, Stenberg v. Carhart, 530 U.S. 914, 120 S. Ct. 2597, 147 L. Ed. 2d 743 (2000) (No. 99-830), 2000 WL 207161, at *1 ("[Feminists for Life] is dedicated to securing basic human rights for all people, especially women and children, from conception until the natural end of life. Among its members are women who oppose [partial-birth abortion] as a threat to the lives of women and children."); Erika Bachiochi, Embodied Equality: Debunking Equal Protection Arguments for Abortion Rights, 34 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'Y 889, 890 (2011) ("[A] growing segment of women instead echoes the views of the early American feminists, who believed that abortion was not only an egregious offense against the most vulnerable human beings, but that it was also an offense against women and women's equality.").
B.
What's more, the district court's claim that it is racist to believe in the sanctity of life is particularly noxious, considering the racial history of abortion advocacy as a tool of the eugenics movement.
Eugenics—the concept of improving the human race through control of the reproductive process—has frequently been associated with explicitly racist viewpoints. "Many eugenicists believed that the distinction between the fit and the unfit could be drawn along racial lines." Box v. Planned Parenthood of Ind. & Ky., Inc., 139 S. Ct. 1780, 1785, 204 L. Ed. 2d 78 (2019) (Thomas, J., concurring) (providing examples). Many eugenics programs, such as sterilization, explicitly targeted minorities—as the district court rightly acknowledged. Jackson Women's Health Org., 349 F. Supp. 3d at 541 n.22 (noting that "Mississippi . . . sterilized six out of ten black women in Sunflower County at the local hospital—against their will").
"From the beginning, birth control and abortion were promoted as means of effectuating eugenics." Box, 139 S. Ct. at 1787 (Thomas, J., concurring). See also id. ("[A]bortion is an act rife with the potential for eugenic manipulation."); id. at 1788  (discussing Margaret Sanger's view that birth control would help control the African American population); id. at 1789 ("Support for abortion can . . . be found throughout the literature on eugenics."); David T. Beito & Linda Royster Beito, Black Maverick: T.R.M. Howard'S Fight For Civil Rights And Economic Power 215 (2009) (noting that some African American civil rights leaders "fretted about the racist implications of abortion"). Indeed, among past abortion advocates were "some eugenicists [who] believed that abortion should be legal for the very purpose of promoting eugenics." Box, 139 S. Ct. at 1789 (Thomas, J., concurring).
Advocates of eugenics might well celebrate, then, that abortion "has proved to be a disturbingly effective tool for implementing the discriminatory preferences that undergird eugenics." Id. at 1790-91 (Thomas, J., concurring) (providing examples). See also id. at 1791 (noting that the current "abortion ratio . . . among black women is nearly 3.5 times the ratio for white women"); William McGurn, White Supremacy and Abortion, WALL ST. J. (Sept. 24, 2019), https://www.wsj.com/articles/white-supremacy-and-abortion-11567460392 (discussing "why so many African-Americans, especially African-American women, have been leaders in the pro-life cause"); id. ("Catherine Davis of the Restoration Project . . . notes that the estimated 20 million black abortions since Roe v. Wade in 1973 are more than the entire African-American population in 1960.").6 
Given the links between abortion and eugenics, accepting the district court's logic—connecting Mississippi's own tragic racial history with the recent enactment of HB 1510—means that the history of abortion advocacy must likewise haunt modern proponents of permissive abortion policies, and infect them with the taint of racism as well. So where does that leave us? Are both sides of the abortion debate racist? I don't imagine the district court would say so. And if not, then the principle invoked by the district court is no principle at all, but merely an instrument with which to bludgeon one side of the abortion debate.7 
  * * *
Federal judges are not elected. Yet the Constitution grants us life tenure. That is not because we are supposed to decide cases based on personal policy preference. It is because we swear an oath to rule based on legal principle alone. I share in the concern, expressed by every state in this circuit, that the district court did not discharge that duty here, and that its opinion diminishes public confidence in the federal judiciary.
It is troubling enough to many Americans of good faith that federal courts, without any basis in constitutional text or original meaning, restrict the ability of states to regulate in the area of abortion. But that is of course what decades of Supreme Court precedent mandates. Accordingly, I am required to affirm.
It adds insult to injury, however, for a federal court to go further and to impugn the motives of those good faith Americans. When that occurs, citizens may rightfully wonder whether judges are deciding disputes based on the Rule of Law or on an altogether different principle. Replacing the Rule of Law with a regime of Judges Know Better is one that neither the Founders of our country nor the Framers of our Constitution would recognize.
I concur in the judgment.

 

