
I agree that this appeal is moot due to recent changes to the Governor's order, and that the case will now return to the district court. I write separately to note how other recent events may affect this case going forward.
* * *
At the outset of the pandemic, public officials declared that the only way to prevent  the spread of the virus was for everyone to stay home and away from each other. They ordered citizens to cease all public activities to the maximum possible extent—even the right to assemble to worship or to protest.
But circumstances have changed. In recent weeks, officials have not only tolerated protests—they have encouraged them as necessary and important expressions of outrage over abuses of government power.
For people of faith demoralized by coercive shutdown policies, that raises a question: If officials are now exempting protesters, how can they justify continuing to restrict worshippers? The answer is that they can't. Government does not have carte blanche, even in a pandemic, to pick and choose which First Amendment rights are "open" and which remain "closed."
 I.
Officials may take appropriate emergency public health measures to combat a pandemic. See Jacobson v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11, 30-31, 25 S. Ct. 358, 49 L. Ed. 643 (1905). See also Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158, 166-67, 64 S. Ct. 438, 88 L. Ed. 645 (1944). But "[n]othing in Jacobson supports the view that an emergency displaces normal constitutional standards." S. Bay United Pentecostal Church v. Newsom, 959 F.3d 938, 942 (9th Cir. 2020) (Collins, J., dissenting) (emphasis omitted).1 
The Governor invokes Employment Division v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 110 S. Ct. 1595, 108 L. Ed. 2d 876 (1990). But Smith upheld a "neutral law of general applicability" against challenge under the Free Exercise Clause. Id. at 879 (quotations omitted). Smith does not cover laws that grant exemptions to some, while denying them to people of faith. "Religious liberty deserves better than that—even under Smith." Horvath v. City of Leander, 946 F.3d 787, 795 (5th Cir. 2020) (Ho, J., concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part).2 
Instead, laws that burden religion while exempting the non-religious must pass strict scrutiny. See Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520, 546, 113 S. Ct. 2217, 124 L. Ed. 2d 472 (1993). The burden on religion "must be justified by a compelling governmental interest," and the law "must be narrowly tailored to advance that interest." Id. at 531-32. That is a heavy lift: Such laws "will survive strict scrutiny only in rare cases." Id. at 546.
I do not expect this to be one of those "rare cases." Id. Pastor Mark Anthony  Spell and his parishioners seek to worship as their faith directs. They cannot do so, however, due to a series of orders by Governor John Bel Edwards that forbid citizens from assembling in public—including inside churches. The Governor no doubt issued those orders out of sincere public health concerns. To survive First Amendment scrutiny, however, those concerns must be applied consistently, not selectively. And it is hard to see how that rule is met here if the record is developed to take account of the recent protests.
It is common knowledge, and easily proved, that protestors do not comply with social distancing requirements.3  But instead of enforcing the Governor's orders, officials are encouraging the protests—out of an admirable, if belated, respect for First Amendment rights. The Governor himself commended citizens for "appropriately expressing their concerns and exercising their First Amendment Rights."4  And he predicted that "we will continue to see peaceful, nonviolent demonstrations and protests where people properly exercise their First Amendment rights."5 
If protests are exempt from social distancing requirements, then worship must be too. As the United States recently observed, "California's political leaders have expressed support for such peaceful protests and, from all appearances, have not required them to adhere to the now operative 100-person limit. . . . [I]t could raise First Amendment concerns if California were to hold other protests . . . to a different standard." Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae at 24, Givens v. Newsom, No. 20-15949 (9th Cir. June 10, 2020). The same principle should apply to people of faith. See, e.g., Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 537 ("[Where] individualized exemptions from a general requirement are available, the government may not refuse to extend that system to cases of religious hardship without compelling reason.") (quotations omitted).
 II.
The Governor may respond that his order forbids only indoor worship but still allows people of faith to worship outdoors. But whether health experts would endorse that dichotomy—and whether the First Amendment permits it—is far from obvious.6 
Underinclusive rules fail strict scrutiny just as overinclusive ones do. A "law cannot be regarded as protecting an interest of the highest order when it leaves appreciable damage to that supposedly vital interest unprohibited." Lukumi, 508 U.S. at 547 (cleaned up). To survive strict scrutiny, then, the Governor must show that a rule restricting indoor worship, while exempting outdoor worship,  is narrowly tailored to further a compelling interest.
That may not be easy. Plaintiffs can presumably find health experts who say outdoor protests present serious health concerns.7  They might also find health experts who support and encourage the protests, not because they pose no health risk, but because their social value outweighs any risk.8 
Such support for the protests reflects a commendable commitment to equality. But public officials cannot devalue people of faith while elevating certain protestors. That would offend the First Amendment—not to mention the principle of equality for which the protests stand. * * *
None of this is to say that Pastor Spell and his parishioners should ignore the advice of health experts. But the same is true for the protestors. No doubt many other Louisianans would have protested too, but for the advice of health experts. The point here is that state and local officials gave them the choice. Those officials took no action when protestors chose to ignore health experts and violate social distancing rules. And that forbearance has consequences.
The First Amendment does not allow our leaders to decide which rights to honor and which to ignore. In law, as in life, what's good for the goose is good for the gander. In these troubled times, nothing should unify the American people more than the principle that freedom for me, but not for thee, has no place under our Constitution.
I concur in the dismissal of this appeal as moot, but in anticipation that a future appeal may turn out very differently.

 

