
The Chief Justice once wrote: "[T]hose who govern should be the last people to help decide who should govern." McCutcheon v. FEC, 572 U.S. 185, 192, 134 S. Ct. 1434, 188 L. Ed. 2d 468 (2014) (plurality op.). This sentiment is deeply engrained in our nation's DNA. As Americans, we have never trusted the fox to guard the henhouse.
In McCutcheon, the Chief applied this skepticism in the context of campaign finance regulation. In sum, regulators say: I want to keep big money out of politics. And fair enough. Money can certainly corrupt. But money can also support speech. See id. at 191-92; see also Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 288, 96 S. Ct. 612, 46 L. Ed. 2d 659 (1976) (Marshall, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("[A]ll Members of the Court agree . . . money is essential for effective communication in a political campaign."). Bribery is prohibited. But speech is protected. And in our legal system, we presume innocence—not corruption. So when regulators regulate too far, citizens may fear that the real purpose is to reduce speech.1 
The case before us today involves voting, not speech. But that raises the question: Should the Chief's sentiments apply here as well? After all, citizens exercise "the right to participate in electing our political leaders . . . in a variety of ways"—they can "urge others to vote" by engaging in and funding political speech, but of course they can also "vote" themselves. McCutcheon, 572 U.S. at 191. So wouldn't it be natural for citizens to harbor the same concerns here—that political interest will triumph over public spirit, whether intentionally or subconsciously, whenever public officials regulate any aspect of how we choose public officials? Whether it's regulating how citizens may vote, or how citizens may urge others to vote, shouldn't citizens insist that we need not simply trust—we must also verify?
One potential difference is that, when it comes to administering elections, someone obviously has to set ground rules to ensure the security and integrity of the ballot box. See Crawford v. Marion County Election Bd., 553 U.S. 181, 191, 128 S. Ct. 1610, 170 L. Ed. 2d 574 (2008) (recognizing "the  State's interest in protecting the integrity and reliability of the electoral process"). The Constitution expressly authorizes states to regulate elections. See U.S. Const. art. I, § 4 ("The times, places and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators."). And so "[c]ommon sense, as well as constitutional law, compels the conclusion that government must play an active role in structuring elections; as a practical matter, there must be a substantial regulation of elections if they are to be fair and honest and if some sort of order, rather than chaos, is to accompany the democratic processes." Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U.S. 428, 433, 112 S. Ct. 2059, 119 L. Ed. 2d 245 (1992) (quotations omitted).
But surely that does not mean citizens must ignore entirely the Chief Justice's admonitions, and blindly trust that regulators never miss their marks. At a minimum, citizens can verify that regulations are lawful and do not infringe on the right to vote.
In this case, Plaintiffs allege that the State of Texas violates voting rights in various ways. For example, the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (also known as the Motor Voter Act) requires, inter alia, that "[a]ny change of address form submitted in accordance with State law for purposes of a State motor vehicle driver's license shall serve as notification of change of address for voter registration." 52 U.S.C. § 20504(d).
On the plain text of the statute, the rule seems simple enough: If it's good enough for motorist licensing, then it ought to be good enough for voter registration. If the system is secure enough to ensure the integrity of the former, then it ought to be secure enough to ensure the integrity of the latter.
Plaintiffs contend that the State of Texas violates this rule. For example, Jarrod Stringer and Benjamin Hernandez alleged, and a respected district judge found, that they each submitted an address change for their driver's licenses—but were nevertheless unable to vote in their new locations during the 2014 federal election cycle.
The State responds, inter alia, that Congress enacted the National Voter Registration Act in 1993—well before the age of the Internet, the advent of online transactions and electronic signatures, and the bevy of security questions that cyber-activities inevitably present.
I agree with my colleagues that we are not at liberty to decide the merits in this case, because none of these Plaintiffs have standing to seek injunctive relief here. They all secured their right to vote by the 2016 election cycle. And they claim no future injury that we can redress today. I therefore join Judge Owen's opinion in full, reversing the judgment of the district court due to Plaintiffs' lack of standing.
But although we have no occasion to decide the merits of Plaintiffs' claims due to their lack of a future injury, that does not prevent us from acknowledging that Plaintiffs have indeed endured an injury in the past. They were unable to exercise their right to vote in past election cycles. And it is a right they will never be able to recover. As citizens, we can hope it is a deprivation they will not experience again—even if the law does not afford them a remedy from this court at this time.
I concur.

 

