
These are difficult times. Many have suffered enormous loss. Many worry about what is coming next. To lose the ability to vote in an upcoming election due to fear of the pandemic would be beyond heartbreaking for citizens who are already hurting, for it is "a right they will never be able to recover." Stringer v. Whitley, 942 F.3d 715, 726 (5th Cir. 2019) (Ho, J., concurring).
State officials have responded by adopting various measures to ensure safety at the polls. If Plaintiffs believe these measures will not be enough, and that only mail-in ballots will suffice, that is understandable. But it is beyond our purview. Under the Constitution, it is a policy decision for the Texas Legislature to make. See U.S. Const. art. I, § 4; see also McDonald v. Bd. of Election Comm'rs of Chicago, 394 U.S. 802, 809, 89 S. Ct. 1404, 22 L. Ed. 2d 739 (1969) (same).
We do not suspend the Constitution during a pandemic. That includes our constitutional structure of government. "Just as other government officials must not exceed their rightful power in extraordinary circumstances, this Court also must not do so"—lest "we abandon the Constitution at the moment we need it most." In re Salon a La Mode, ___ S.W.3d ___, ___, 2020 Tex. LEXIS 389 (Tex. 2020) (Blacklock, J., concurring). Even—indeed, especially—in times of strife, fidelity to our Constitution must endure and guide us through the crisis.
I agree that we should grant a stay of the preliminary injunction pending appeal and thus join Judge Smith's powerful opinion for the court.
 I.
The right to vote is fundamental to our constitutional democracy. But it means nothing if your vote doesn't count. And it won't count if it's cancelled by a fraudulent vote—as the Supreme Court has made clear in case after case.
"Every voter's vote is entitled to be counted"—and that means every vote must be "protected from the diluting effect of illegal ballots." Gray v. Sanders, 372 U.S. 368, 380, 83 S. Ct. 801, 9 L. Ed. 2d 821 (1963). "[P]rotection of the integrity of the ballot box is surely a legitimate state concern." O'Brien v. Skinner, 414 U.S. 524, 534, 94 S. Ct. 740, 38 L. Ed. 2d 702 (1974) (Marshall, J., concurring). There should be "no question about the legitimacy or importance of the State's interest in counting only the votes of eligible voters." Crawford v. Marion Cnty. Election Bd., 553 U.S. 181, 196, 128 S. Ct. 1610, 170 L. Ed. 2d 574 (2008) (plurality op. of Stevens, J.).
As Justice Stevens noted, "the risk of voter fraud" is "real." Id. And "it could affect the outcome of a close election." Id. "[F]lagrant examples of such fraud . . . have been documented throughout this Nation's history by respected historians and journalists." Id. at 195 (collecting examples).1 
 What's more, courts have repeatedly found that mail-in ballots are particularly susceptible to fraud. In Crawford, the plurality noted "Indiana's own experience with fraudulent voting in the 2003 Democratic primary for East Chicago Mayor"—a fraud "perpetrated using absentee ballots." Id. at 195. And it observed that "much of the fraud" that has occurred in various elections nationwide "was actually absentee ballot fraud or voter registration fraud." Id. at 195 n.12. It cited an amicus brief that found "extensive problems with absentee ballot fraud" in various elections—including a 1997 Miami election that "was overturned on the basis of absentee ballot fraud." Brief of Amici Curiae The Brennan Center for Justice et al., at 12. Where voter fraud has been detected, "it generally takes the form of organized fraud," including "use of fraudulent absentee or mail-in ballots." Id. at 19. See also id. at 21 (noting "thousands of incidents of possible absentee ballot fraud").2 
Numerous members of our court have likewise concluded that "mail-in ballot fraud is a significant threat"—so much so that "the potential and reality of fraud is much greater in the mail-in ballot context than with in-person voting." Veasey v. Abbott, 830 F.3d 216, 239, 256 (5th Cir. 2016) (en banc). See also id. at 263 ("[M]ail-in voting . . . is far more vulnerable to fraud."); id. (recognizing "the far more prevalent issue of fraudulent absentee ballots").3 
There is no suggestion that these widely held concerns about voter fraud will not be present during the pandemic. So if there is to be expansion of mailin voting notwithstanding these findings, our Constitution and precedents remind us that it must be done by legislators, not judges.
 II.
For nearly a century, mail-in voting has been the exception—and inperson voting the rule—in Texas. Under Texas law, only certain groups— including the disabled, the elderly, certain persons confined in jail, and voters who will be absent from the jurisdiction during the voting period—may vote by mail. See TEX. ELEC. CODE §§ 82.001-82.004, 82.007.
Plaintiffs claim that Texas law is unconstitutional. They offer two theories for why judges, rather than legislators, should expand  mail-in voting: (1) voters fear going to public polling places due to the pandemic, and (2) Texas law discriminates on the basis of age. I address each theory in turn.
 A.
First, Plaintiffs contend that, due to the pandemic, voters fear going to public polling places. Their concerns are very real, and very well taken.
But under governing Supreme Court precedent, expanding access to mail-in voting to redress personal hardship—as opposed to state action, O'Brien, 414 U.S. at 525-27, 529-31—is a policy matter for the Legislature, not the courts. See, e.g., McDonald, 394 U.S. at 809; see also U.S. CONST. art. I, § 4 ("The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof.").
In McDonald, a group of eligible voters in county jail could not go to the polls, either "because they are charged with nonbailable offenses" or "because they have been unable to post the bail imposed by the courts." 394 U.S. at 803. Nor did they qualify for mail-in ballots under state law. So they sued under the Equal Protection Clause. But the Court rejected their claim. And that decision likely forecloses the equal protection claim presented here as well.
As the Court explained, absentee voting is "designed to make voting more available to some groups who cannot easily get to the polls." Id. at 807. So such laws increase options—not restrictions. They "do not themselves deny [voters] the exercise of the franchise." Id. at 807-08 (emphasis added).
Of course, there will always be other voters for whom, through no fault of the state, getting to the polls is "difficult" or even "impossible." Id. at 810. See also id. at 810 n.8 (collecting examples). But as the Court explains, that is a matter of personal hardship, not state action. For courts to intervene, a voter must show that the state "has in fact precluded [voters] from voting"—that the voter has been "prohibited from voting by the State." Id. at 808 & n.7.
The plaintiffs in McDonald failed to make this showing. As the Court observed, "the record is barren of any indication that the State might not, for instance, furnish the jails with special polling booths or facilities on election day, or provide guarded transportation to the polls themselves for certain inmates, or entertain motions for temporary reductions in bail to allow some inmates to get to the polls on their own." Id. at 808 n.6. Cf. O'Brien, 414 U.S. at 529-31 (noting failure to provide alternative measures stated in McDonald).
The record here is, if anything, even stronger for the state than in McDonald. There is affirmative evidence here that officials are taking various steps to ensure safety at the polls—measures familiar to anyone who has recently visited a grocery store. According to a sworn declaration, they include:
• "training election workers on best practices for setting up polling locations for social distancing, including determining maximum capacity inside the voting areas,"
• "[p]roviding a table-mounted Plexiglas protective shield at each voter check-in station,"
• "[p]roviding protective masks for all election workers,"
• "[p]roviding sanitizing wipes and hand sanitizer to each location in sufficient quantities as to accommodate voter  turnout and equipment sanitation needs,"
• "[p]roviding social distancing floor decals to polling places to ensure safety recommendations are practiced inside and outside the location,"
• "[o]ffering cotton swabs to voters to use as a disposable stylus for marking their ballot selections on the touch screen ballot marking device,"
• "[p]lacing additional election workers in polling places to assist with changes relating to . . . the safety measures," and
• "[p]reparing for increased curbside voting traffic at polling places."
In sum, election officials "are working in earnest to ensure adherence to social distancing, limits on the number of people in one place, and constant sanitation of facilities." In re State of Texas, ___ S.W.3d ___, ___, 2020 Tex. LEXIS 389 (Tex. 2020).
So this is not a case of official intransigence, as in O'Brien, 414 U.S. at 525-27. Tellingly, neither Plaintiffs nor the district court even mention O'Brien, and they invoke McDonald only in passing. They instead focus their attention on the Twenty-Sixth Amendment—a claim to which I will now turn.4 
 B.
Plaintiffs contend that, separate and apart from the pandemic, the Texas absentee ballot law expressly discriminates on the basis of age, because it permits all persons over the age of 65 to vote by mail, but does not provide that same automatic right to those under 65.
The Twenty-Sixth Amendment forbids discrimination in voting "on account of age." Similarly, the Fifteenth Amendment forbids discrimination in voting "on account of race." The text of the Fifteenth Amendment closely tracks the text of the Twenty-Sixth Amendment. And it would presumably run afoul of the Constitution to allow only voters of a particular race to vote by mail. See McDonald, 394 U.S. at 807 (offering vote-by-mail on the basis of race would trigger "more exacting judicial scrutiny").
Plaintiffs do not mention the Fifteenth Amendment here, however. Nor do any of the amici. Moreover, the majority opinion correctly observes that the Supreme Court has said little to date about the Twenty-Sixth Amendment, and that the closest analogy available under current precedent is the McDonald approach to the Fourteenth Amendment. That is surely right. I would simply add that, even if one were to assume that Texas law violates the Twenty-Sixth Amendment, the preliminary injunction is likely flawed for another reason.
The Supreme Court has repeatedly held that "there are 'two remedial alternatives' . . . when a statute benefits one class . . . and excludes another from the benefit." Sessions v. Morales-Santana, 137 S. Ct. 1678, 1698, 198 L. Ed. 2d 150 (2017). The remedy must provide equal treatment, of course. But equal treatment can be achieved either by "withdrawal of benefits from the favored class" or by "extension  of benefits to the excluded class." Id. "How equality is accomplished . . . is a matter on which the Constitution is silent." Id. (quotations omitted).
So how do courts decide which remedy to order? Do we "level up" (everyone gets to vote by mail) or "level down" (no one gets to)? To decide, courts must determine "what the legislature would have willed had it been apprised of the constitutional infirmity." Id. at 1699 (quotations omitted). We look to "the legislature's intent, as revealed by the statute at hand." Id. If "the discriminatory exception consists of favorable treatment for a discrete group," we "strik[e] the discriminatory exception" and "extend[] the general rule . . . to cover the previously favored group." Id.
These principles readily apply here. Under Texas law, in-person voting is the rule, and mail-in voting is the exception. And that is consistent with the judicial consensus that "fraud is much greater in the mail-in ballot context than with in-person voting." Veasey, 830 F.3d at 239 (en banc).
So if Plaintiffs are entitled to relief, it is presumably the "leveling-down" injunction noted by Texas—an injunction "requiring all to vote in person," not one "extend[ing] mail-in voting to those under 65." As then-Judge Ginsburg once put it: "[W]hich would the political branches choose? It would take a court bolder than this one to predict . . . that extension, not invalidation, would be the probable choice." Olsen v. Drug Enforcement Admin., 878 F.2d 1458, 1464, 279 U.S. App. D.C. 1 (D.C. Cir. 1989).
If Plaintiffs have a legal theory to justify a "leveling-up" injunction, they did not offer one here. Nor did the district court. So a stay is warranted.5 
* * *
Our charge here is simple. As the majority opinion points out, and the Supreme Court recently reaffirmed: "[W]hen a lower court intervenes and alters the election rules so close to the election date, our precedents indicate that this Court, as appropriate, should correct that error." Republican Nat'l Comm. v. Democratic Nat'l Comm., 140 S. Ct. 1205, 1207, 206 L. Ed. 2d 452 (2020). The district court demonstrably erred here, and in more ways than one—as the majority opinion extensively documents. Most notably, the district court ignored virtually the entire body of governing Supreme Court precedent relevant to this case, including McDonald, O'Brien, and Morales-Santana. So the state is likely to prevail in this appeal. I concur.
GREGG COSTA