
Nothing is more corrosive to public confidence in our criminal justice system than the perception that there are two different legal standards—one for the powerful, the popular, and the well-connected, and another for everyone else. I fear that the sentence awarded in this case—probation only, no prison time, despite multiple acts of tax evasion and false tax returns across a twelve-year period—will only further fuel public cynicism and distrust of our institutions of government.
Under the federal Sentencing Guidelines, the defendant here was subject to a guidelines imprisonment range of 27 to 33 months. To gain leniency, he boasted that, as the longtime Chief Deputy of the Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office—the primary law enforcement and tax collecting agency in Jefferson Parish and the largest sheriff's office in Louisiana—he has enjoyed an otherwise "unblemished" record of public service (that is, other than his twelve years  of unabashed pillaging of the public treasury). He also secured letters of support from prominent state and local officials and other members of the community. The district court granted the request for leniency and reduced his sentence to five years of probation and a fine. The government, understandably, appealed.
As our panel observes today, established precedents require us to apply a strong measure of deference to district courts when it comes to appellate review of criminal sentencing decisions. See, e.g., United States v. Hoffman, 901 F.3d 523, 560 (5th Cir. 2018) ("We defer to both upward and downward variances so long as the district court provides an explanation tailored to the statutory sentencing factors that is not outside the bounds of reasonableness.").
So I have no quarrel with my distinguished colleagues, who are only dutifully following the legal precedents that all court of appeals judges must obey. Likewise, the district judge who issued this sentence, and to whom we owe significant deference under established precedents, is among the most experienced and respected in our circuit.
But deference need not mask disagreement. The defendant was convicted on six counts of tax evasion, five counts of filing a false tax return, and one count of failing to file a tax return. Yet he will serve no prison time. This despite the fact that he filed false tax returns, not once, but every year for twelve years. Among other things, he claimed a series of brazenly false business expense deductions—ignoring repeated warnings from his accountant—including:
• an Alaskan cruise with his wife and friends;
• his uniform, firearms, training, and first responder equipment—even though they were all provided to him, free of charge, by the Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office;
• expenses associated with driving approximately 80,000 miles, allegedly for business purposes, on his two co-owned cars—even though the odometers on his two cars reflected a combined total mileage of less than 40,000 miles.
As a result, he deprived the public treasury of nearly a quarter million dollars (perhaps he would have taken even more, but he was limited by the amount of his actual tax liability).
These are not the acts of a faithful public servant. What's more, imagine an ordinary citizen of Louisiana—one without the power and connections that come with holding powerful office—had defrauded the United States of nearly a quarter million dollars. Would that person have received zero prison time as well?1 
During the defendant's sentencing hearing, the district judge observed that "the public is fed up with politicians and people  in public life who cut corners at the expense of the public." I concur.

 

