
Corey Reeves Bostic is no ordinary drug dealer. When he saw a 24-year-old woman overdosing on heroin, he did not try to help save her life. He sold her methamphetamine instead. She died shortly thereafter. And the medical examiner later stated the obvious: Although there was no conclusive proof of but-for causation, it was likely that the meth contributed to her death, along with her taking heroin and her underlying heart condition.
Bostic pleaded guilty to conspiracy to distribute and distributing methamphetamine. See 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), 841(b)(1)(C), and 846. Congress has imposed a mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years and a maximum of 40 years for these offenses. 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(B). The Presentence Report, however, calculated only a 21 to 27 months range under the United States Sentencing Guidelines.
Not surprisingly, the district court found that range "wanting" considering the "seriousness of the offense and the death." So the court imposed a significant upward variance, sentencing Bostic to 235 months, or roughly half the maximum 40-year prison sentence set by Congress.
The reason for this significant upward variance seems obvious, befitting one of the most horrible fact patterns imaginable under the statute. At sentencing, the Government highlighted Bostic's "depravity that . . . is not common to human experience." As the Government explained, an "upward variance is appropriate to say life matters. And when you stand by and are part of a system, part of a scene where drug use is rampant and it ruins people's lives and you watch people die without lifting a finger to help them, that's something that we take seriously because we value life."
The court agreed with the Government and entered an upward variance under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) in light of "the devastating facts of this case." I find no procedural defect, warranting vacatur and remand, in what the district court did. See, e.g., United States v. Fraga, 704 F.3d 432, 439 (5th Cir. 2013) ("[T]he district court need not engage in robotic incantations that each statutory factor has been considered . . . . [T]he sentencing judge heard and considered the evidence and arguments . . . and gave [the defendant] multiple opportunities to speak and present mitigating evidence.") (cleaned up); United States v. Key, 599 F.3d 469, 474 (5th Cir. 2010) ("[T]here is no error when examining the full sentencing record reveals the district court's reasons for the chosen sentence and allows for effective review by this court.") (cleaned up). (To the extent a clerical error exists in the judgment form, a limited remand is sufficient to allow the district court to fix the error. See Fed. R. Crim. P. 36.)
That said, I take heart in the majority's invitation to the district court to issue precisely the same sentence on remand. After all, there is nothing substantively unreasonable about sentencing Bostic to less than half the maximum 40-year prison sentence set by Congress. And "[a]ppellate review of the substantive reasonableness of a sentence is highly deferential." United States v. Hoffman, 901 F.3d 523, 554 (5th Cir. 2019) (cleaned up). See also, e.g., id. at 565-65 (Dennis, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (collecting cases upholding upward variances higher than 1214% above-Guidelines recommendations).1 
* * *
The 235-month sentence is both procedurally and substantively reasonable. I respectfully dissent.

 

