, joined by OWEN, Chief Judge, and JONES, STEWART, DENNIS, ELROD, HAYNES, GRAVES, HIGGINSON, and ENGELHARDT, Circuit Judges:
When a plaintiff sues multiple defendants, counsel may need to take certain steps to ensure the plaintiff's right to appeal. That is because courts of appeals have jurisdiction to review only certain types of district court decisions.
Under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, courts of appeals may review only "final decisions" of the district courts. Under our precedents, there is no final decision if a plaintiff voluntarily dismisses a defendant without prejudice, because the plaintiff "is entitled to bring a later suit on the same cause of action." Ryan v. Occidental Petroleum Corp., 577 F.2d 298, 302 (5th Cir. 1978). And in a suit against multiple defendants, there is no final decision as to one defendant until there is a final decision as to all defendants. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b) (absent an order to the contrary, "any order or other decision, however designated, that adjudicates fewer than all the claims or the rights and liabilities of fewer than all the parties does not end the action as to any of the claims or parties").
A potential complication arises when a case implicates both of those principles—that is, when a plaintiff sues two defendants, and then voluntarily dismisses one defendant without prejudice, while litigating against the other to conclusion. Some have expressed concern that the plaintiff may fall into a "finality trap"—unable to obtain an appealable final decision, despite having lost to the second defendant. See Terry W. Shackmann & Barry L. Pickens, The Finality Trap: Accidentally Losing Your Right to Appeal (Part I), 58 J. MO. B. 78, 78 (2002).
 But established rules of civil procedure provide many tools to avoid that alleged "trap." They include amendment of the complaint to remove claims or parties under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 15(a); severance of parties under Rule 21; and entry of a partial final judgment under Rule 54(b).1  A plaintiff can also voluntarily dismiss a defendant with prejudice.
In this case, Plaintiffs chose Rule 54(b). As a result, there is no need to address the other finality issues raised by the parties. Because we conclude that the district court properly entered partial final judgment under Rule 54(b), we have jurisdiction to hear these appeals and accordingly return them to the panel for a ruling on the merits.
 I.
Plaintiffs Tarsia and Breck Williams sued twenty-four defendants after their father died from mesothelioma. After protracted litigation before a multi-district litigation court, several defendants, including Taylor Seidenbach, Inc., and McCarty Corp., obtained summary judgment.
The Williamses subsequently moved to dismiss the remaining defendants, including CSR, Ltd., Environmental Abatement Services, Inc., and The Gottfried Corp., pursuant to Rule 41(a). The district court granted the Rule 41(a) dismissal motions, but it did not specify whether the dismissals were with or without prejudice. The Williamses then appealed as to the several defendants who had previously obtained summary judgment, including Taylor Seidenbach and McCarty.
On appeal, this court held that CSR, Environmental Abatement Services, and Gottfried were dismissed without prejudice. Accordingly, we dismissed the appeal for want of a "final decision" under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Williams v. Taylor-Seidenbach, Inc. (Williams I), 748 F. App'x 584, 587-88 (5th Cir. 2018).
In response, the Williamses sought and obtained partial final judgment under Rule 54(b) as to various defendants, including Taylor Seidenbach and McCarty, and then appealed again. A panel of this court held that the district court lacked the power to enter partial final judgment under Rule 54(b), and therefore dismissed the appeal once again for want of a final decision. Williams v. Taylor Seidenbach, Inc. (Williams II), 935 F.3d 358, 360 (5th Cir. 2019), vacated on rehearing en banc, 941 F.3d 1183 (5th Cir. 2019).
We subsequently granted rehearing en banc. We now conclude that Rule 54(b) authorized the district court to enter partial final judgment following the dismissal of the remaining defendants under Rule 41(a), and that this appeal may therefore proceed.
 II.
This case involves the intersection of two different Federal Rules of Civil Procedure—Rules 41(a) and 54(b). Accordingly, we address Rule 41(a) briefly, before turning to Rule 54(b).
Rule 41(a) allows plaintiffs to voluntarily dismiss "an action." One could—as the dissent does—plausibly construe "action" under Rule 41(a) to refer only to the entire case and not to individual defendants. See Harvey Aluminum, Inc. v. Am.  Cyanamid Co., 203 F.2d 105, 108 (2nd Cir. 1953). But our circuit precedents interpret "action" to cover individual defendants—thus allowing plaintiffs, like the Williamses, to use Rule 41(a) to dismiss individual defendants. See Nat'l City Golf Fin. v. Scott, 899 F.3d 412, 415 n.3 (5th Cir. 2018) ("Rule 41(a) permits a plaintiff to dismiss just one defendant, 'even though the action against another defendant would remain pending.'") (quoting Plains Growers, Inc. ex rel. Florists' Mut. Ins. Co. v. Ickes-Braun Glasshouses, Inc., 474 F.2d 250, 253 (5th Cir. 1973)); Exxon Corp. v. Md. Cas. Co., 599 F.2d 659, 662-63 (5th Cir. 1979) (distinguishing between impermissible Rule 41(a) dismissals of individual claims and permissible Rule 41(a) dismissals of individual defendants).
In this en banc proceeding, the parties do not challenge the validity of our circuit precedents permitting the Williamses to voluntarily dismiss individual defendants under Rule 41(a). That is unsurprising. For even if we were to reconsider our precedent and to construe Rule 41(a) to permit voluntary dismissal only of an entire case, and not of individual defendants, we would still conclude that there is appellate jurisdiction over this appeal.
To see why, assume that Rule 41(a) only allows dismissals of the entire case. Then the Williamses' Rule 41(a) dismissal, which sought to dismiss only some of the defendants, was invalid, and an invalid Rule 41(a) dismissal is a nullity. So the claims against the purportedly dismissed defendants would still be "pending in district court," as circuit precedents confirm. Exxon, 599 F.2d at 663. See also Perry v. Schumacher Grp. of La., 891 F.3d 954, 958-59 (11th Cir. 2018) ("[T]he [Rule 41(a)(1)(A)] Stipulation, which purported to dismiss 'Count III of the Fourth Amended Complaint . . . without prejudice,' was invalid. By stroke of sheer good fortune for Dr. Perry, the Stipulation did not divest the District Court of its jurisdiction.").
The upshot is this: If we accept the dissent's reading of Rule 41(a), then the claims against the purportedly dismissed defendants were in fact never dismissed, but instead were indisputably pending before the district court at the time it entered partial final judgment under Rule 54(b). It therefore follows that the partial final judgments under Rule 54(b) were valid—even under the dissent's understanding of Rules 41(a) and 54(b)—and that we therefore have jurisdiction over this appeal.
But as we shall explain, we can also reach that same result without upsetting circuit precedent. And because that is so, we have no occasion to reconsider our precedent. See United States v. Castillo-Rivera, 853 F.3d 218, 221 n.1 (5th Cir. 2017) (en banc) (refusing to revisit circuit precedent where it was "not necessary to our disposition of [the] case").
 III.
We turn now to the validity—and appealability—of the partial final judgments entered by the district court here under Rule 54(b).
The courts of appeals are courts of limited jurisdiction, "possess[ing] only that power authorized by Constitution and statute." Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of Am., 511 U.S. 375, 377, 114 S. Ct. 1673, 128 L. Ed. 2d 391 (1994). Under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, courts of appeals have jurisdiction to review "final decisions" of the district courts.
Congress has "empowered [the Supreme Court] to clarify when a decision qualifies as 'final' for appellate review purposes, and to expand the list of orders appealable on an interlocutory basis." Swint v. Chambers Cty. Comm'n, 514 U.S. 35, 48, 115 S. Ct.  1203, 131 L. Ed. 2d 60 (1995). "The procedure Congress ordered for such changes, however, is not expansion by court decision, but by rulemaking." Id. (emphasis added). See 28 U.S.C. § 2072(a), (c) ("The Supreme Court shall have the power to prescribe general rules of practice and procedure . . . . Such rules may define when a ruling of a district court is final for the purposes of appeal under section 1291 of this title."). See also Microsoft Corp. v. Baker, 137 S. Ct. 1702, 1712-13, 198 L. Ed. 2d 132 (2017) (instructing courts not to "subvert[] the final-judgment rule and the process Congress has established for refining that rule").
The Supreme Court has thus instructed that "Congress' designation of the rulemaking process as the way to define or refine when a district court ruling is 'final' and when an interlocutory order is appealable warrants the Judiciary's full respect." Swint, 514 U.S. at 48. So when a question arises about appealability in light of the final judgment rule, courts and litigants must adhere to a simple principle: follow the rules. That is what, after various twists and turns, the Williamses did here—they invoked Rule 54(b) to secure a "final judgment as to one or more, but fewer than all, claims or parties."
 A.
To begin, it is important to understand what the Williamses want: appellate review of the district court's entry of summary judgment as to certain defendants, without litigating all the claims they brought against all the defendants they sued.
There are many ways they could have achieved that under current precedent without running afoul of the final judgment rule. They could have dismissed the remaining defendants with prejudice under Rule 41(a). See, e.g., Marshall v. Kan. City S. Ry. Co., 378 F.3d 495, 500 (5th Cir. 2004). They could have amended their complaint to excise any remaining claims or parties under Rule 15(a). See, e.g., Rockwell Int'l Corp. v. United States, 549 U.S. 457, 473-74, 127 S. Ct. 1397, 167 L. Ed. 2d 190 (2007) ("[W]hen a plaintiff . . . voluntarily amends the complaint, courts look to the amended complaint to determine jurisdiction."); Nat'l Broiler Mktg. Ass'n v. United States, 436 U.S. 816, 819 n.5, 98 S. Ct. 2122, 56 L. Ed. 2d 728 (1978) (noting that a party used Rule 15(a) "to facilitate the appeal"). They could have requested severance of certain parties under Rule 21. See United States v. O'Neil, 709 F.2d 361, 368 (5th Cir. 1983). Or they could do what they did here: seek a partial final judgment under Rule 54(b).
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(b) states:
When an action presents more than one claim for relief—whether as a claim, counterclaim, crossclaim, or third-party claim—or when multiple parties are involved, the court may direct entry of a final judgment as to one or more, but fewer than all, claims or parties only if the court expressly determines that there is no just reason for delay. Otherwise, any order or other decision, however designated, that adjudicates fewer than all the claims or the rights and liabilities of fewer than all the parties does not end the action as to any of the claims or parties and may be revised at any time before the entry of a judgment adjudicating all the claims and all the parties' rights and liabilities.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b).
Rule 54(b) thus sets forth the governing framework for determining finality in a suit against multiple defendants. Of course, once the district court has decided all claims against all parties, that decision is plainly final. By contrast, any order that  resolves "the rights and liabilities of fewer than all the parties" is not final—because any such order "may be revised at any time" before final judgment. Id. So if a party wishes to appeal such an order, it must ask the district court to enter "a final judgment as to one or more, but fewer than all, claims or parties," and the court should do so, provided "there is no just reason for delay." Id.
By following the framework set forth in Rule 54(b) and obtaining a partial final judgment as to Taylor Seidenbach and McCarty, the Williamses preserved their right to appeal against those defendants.
 B.
Rule 54(b) sets forth a straightforward path that the Williamses dutifully followed. The only wrinkle is whether a district court can enter partial final judgment where a plaintiff first litigates the case to conclusion as to various defendants, and then voluntarily dismisses all remaining defendants under Rule 41(a) at the end of the case—as the Williamses did here.
We see no reason why the order of events should alter the court's power under Rule 54(b). Indeed, our court allowed entry of partial final judgment under Rule 54(b) under substantially indistinguishable circumstances in Swope v. Columbian Chemicals Co., 281 F.3d 185 (5th Cir. 2002). In Swope, the district court granted summary judgment to one defendant, and then later granted summary judgment to the second defendant as to all but one claim. Id. at 190. In response, the plaintiff moved to dismiss the remaining claim under Rule 41(a) and to obtain an appealable partial final judgment as to the rest of the case under Rule 54(b). Id. The district court obliged, dismissing the remaining claim without prejudice and then immediately entering a Rule 54(b) judgment as to the summary judgment orders. Id. at 190-91 & nn.1-2. The plaintiff subsequently appealed, and our court accepted jurisdiction over that appeal. Id. at 194.
What's more, our court in Swope expressly pointed out that the timing of the Rule 41(a) dismissal did not matter to its analysis—the appeal of the Rule 54(b) judgment was valid regardless. As the court went out of its way to observe, "[i]t is unnecessary to decide . . . whether the dismissal took effect upon filing . . . of the [Rule 41] motion"—and therefore, like in this case, well before the entry of partial final judgment under Rule 54(b)—"or upon the trial court's granting[] of the motion." Id. at 192 n.15. Translation: Entry of a partial final judgment is proper under Rule 54(b) regardless of whether it occurs before or after the voluntary dismissal of any remaining defendants under Rule 41(a).
Swope is correct and we apply it here. Rule 54(b) authorizes district courts to "direct entry of a final judgment as to one or more, but fewer than all, claims or parties." Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b). And a voluntary dismissal of some defendants under Rule 41(a) at the end of the case does not alter the court's Rule 54(b) authority in any way. A dismissed claim remains a part of the case, absent amendment of the complaint under Rule 15. And that is so regardless of when the Rule 41(a) dismissal occurs. Likewise, the fully litigated claims—such as the partial summary judgment claims that the Williamses hope to appeal here—naturally remain pending before the court as well. See, e.g., Nat'l City Golf Fin., 899 F.3d at 415 n.3 ("Rule 41(a) permits a plaintiff to dismiss just one defendant, 'even though the action against another defendant would remain pending.'") (quoting Plains Growers, 474 F.2d  at 253).2 
So there is no reason why a district court cannot enter a partial final judgment under Rule 54(b) when any remaining defendants are voluntarily dismissed at the end of a case under Rule 41(a).
Notably, a distinguished panel of the Seventh Circuit reached the same conclusion in ITOFCA, Inc. v. MegaTrans Logistics, Inc., 235 F.3d 360 (7th Cir. 2000). ITOFCA involved the same sequence of events as this case—entry of summary judgment as to some claims, followed by dismissal of the rest of the case without prejudice. See id. at 362-63. The Seventh Circuit concluded that Rule 54(b) would generally authorize entry of partial final judgment under those circumstances. Its reasoning was simple: A dismissal without prejudice is equivalent to no dismissal at all because the claim can be refiled at any time. Id. at 364. So we may—indeed, according to the Seventh Circuit, we "must," id.—act as if the claim is still pending before the district court.
To begin with, the Seventh Circuit concluded, as we did in Swope, that the dismissal of certain claims without prejudice deprived plaintiffs of finality as to the other claims. "[W]e must view the counterclaims dismissed without prejudice as if they are still before the district court, which they could be at any moment. Since we would not have appellate jurisdiction under § 1291 if the court had not dismissed the counterclaims, we have no appellate jurisdiction under the circumstances as they now exist." Id. at 364.
As a result, the Seventh Circuit concluded, the plaintiff must take some additional step, such as entry of partial final judgment under Rule 54(b), in order to appeal any of the other claims. That is because "Rule 54(b) authorizes the district court to make immediately appealable a judgment that disposes, with finality, of one or more (but not all) claims, even though other claims remain pending in the district court so that the suit as a whole has not been finally disposed of by that court." Id. Thus, "[g]iven . . . that the dismissal of MegaTrans' counterclaims without prejudice has not created a final decision that allows for Section 1291 review, Rule 54(b) would seem to be an adequate alternative means of gaining appellate jurisdiction." Id.3 
That conclusion is unsurprising given the plain text of Rule 54(b): A district court "may direct entry of a final judgment as to one or more, but fewer than all, claims or parties." Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(b). And a district court may do so in any case that "presents more than one claim for relief—whether as a claim, counterclaim, crossclaim, or third-party claim—or when multiple parties are involved." Id. "Otherwise"—that is, in the absence of a partial final judgment under Rule 54(b)—"any order or other decision . . . that adjudicates fewer than all the claims or the rights and liabilities of fewer than all the parties does not end the action as to any of the claims or parties and may be revised at any time." Id.
In other words, the text of Rule 54(b) identifies the problem that it is attempting to solve (adjudication as to only some parties  or only some claims "does not end the action" and is thus not, by itself, a final judgment), and then provides the solution (district courts may enter partial final judgment to facilitate appeal).
The Supreme Court has made clear that the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure warrant our "full respect" as "the way to define or refine when a district court ruling is 'final' and when an interlocutory order is appealable." Swint, 514 U.S. at 48. Consistent with that command, we conclude that Rule 54(b) provides a complete solution for plaintiffs who, like the Williamses, sue multiple defendants, but then later seek an appealable final judgment as to only a subset of those defendants.
 C.
Plaintiffs have many options to preserve their right to appeal under these circumstances, and the Williamses have properly exercised one of those options here. As a result, we need not answer certain questions that have been raised in this en banc proceeding. For example, some have argued that voluntary dismissal of a defendant or claim without prejudice is a final decision and thus does not deprive this court of appellate jurisdiction—and that we should thus revisit Ryan. See Williams II, 935 F.3d at 361-62 (Haynes, J., concurring). Others have responded that a voluntary dismissal without prejudice is not a "final decision" because the dismissal decides nothing—the plaintiff can re-file—and at a minimum, stare decisis commands respect for that understanding of finality because it is not demonstrably erroneous. See Blue v. D.C. Pub. Sch., 764 F.3d 11, 17, 412 U.S. App. D.C. 181 (D.C. Cir. 2014) (noting that "[e]very circuit . . . appears to acknowledge a presumption against" treating a voluntary dismissal without prejudice as a final decision) (collecting cases). Our decision today avoids the need to resolve those issues.
* * *
The vortex of the finality trap lurks whenever a plaintiff sues a basket of defendants. But established rules of civil procedure offer various tools for avoiding that trap. The Williamses used one of those tools here—partial final judgment under Rule 54(b). As a result, we have jurisdiction to hear these appeals. We therefore return these cases to the panel for a decision on the merits.
Concur by: JAMES C. HO; DON R. WILLETT; LESLIE H. SOUTHWICK  
Concur




JAMES C. HO