
  NeutralAs of: September 19, 2020 8:23 PM Z
Cook v. Garner
United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
June 17, 2020, Filed
No. 19-5931

Reporter
2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 19024 *
 DONNA LEE COOK, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. MARCIA GARNER; TENNESSEE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES, Defendants-Appellees.  
Notice: NOT RECOMMENDED FOR FULL-TEXT PUBLICATION. SIXTH CIRCUIT RULE 28 LIMITS CITATION TO SPECIFIC SITUATIONS. PLEASE SEE RULE 28 BEFORE CITING IN A PROCEEDING IN A COURT IN THE SIXTH CIRCUIT. IF CITED, A COPY MUST BE SERVED ON OTHER PARTIES AND THE COURT. THIS NOTICE IS TO BE PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED IF THIS DECISION IS REPRODUCED.
  
Subsequent History: Rehearing denied by Cook v. Garner, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 29288 (6th Cir., Sept. 15, 2020)  
Prior History:  [*1] ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE MIDDLE DISTRICT OF TENNESSEE.
Cook v. Garner, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 126922, 2019 WL 3412253 (M.D. Tenn., July 26, 2019)  
Counsel: Donna Lee Cook, Plaintiff - Appellant, Pro se, Lebanon, TN. 
For Marcia Garner, Tennessee Department of Human Services, Defendants - Appellees: Colleen Elizabeth Mallea, Office of the Attorney General, Nashville, TN.  
Judges: Before: GUY, DONALD, and LARSEN, Circuit Judges. LARSEN, Circuit Judge, concurring in the judgment.  
Opinion




 ORDER
Donna Lee Cook, proceeding pro se, appeals the district court's dismissal of her employment discrimination case, filed pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq.; the Age Discrimination in Employment Act ("ADEA"), 29 U.S.C. § 621, et seq.; the Family Medical Leave Act of 1993 ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601, et seq.; Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII"), 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq; and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. This case has been referred to a panel of the court that, upon examination, unanimously agrees that oral argument is not needed. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a).
Then proceeding through counsel, Cook,1  a former administrative secretary for the State of Tennessee's Department of Human Resources' ("DHS") Medicaid Unit, filed an amended complaint against the State of Tennessee ("the State") and Marcia Garner, the Director of DHS's Medicaid Policy Unit. According to Cook, in 2014, [*2]  the Medicaid Unit notified its employees that it would drastically reduce its workforce, and Garner and DHS encouraged all employees to contact Human Resources employee Gena Lewis, who would help them find employment with other State offices and departments. Eventually, Cook was transferred from her position with DHS's Medicaid Unit, which was housed in the state office building, to the Davidson County DHS office. According to Cook, the county position was less prestigious and working conditions at the county office were less favorable because she was required to interact with the public. Cook had also applied for numerous other state positions but had not yet been hired at the time she filed this complaint. She alleged that other younger, non-disabled employees who had not filed protected complaints were promoted, transferred to equivalent state-level positions, or hired for state employment, while she was transferred to the county office.
Cook's complaint set forth eleven counts: (1) failure to accommodate her need to avoid contact with the general public due to a mechanical heart valve that was susceptible to infection, in violation of the ADA; (2) violating the Tennessee Disability [*3]  Act, Tennessee Code Annotated § 8-50-103, by refusing to accommodate her disability; (3) age discrimination, in violation of the ADEA; (4) retaliation for exercising her rights under the FMLA; (5-9) retaliation in violation of Title VII, the ADEA, the ADA, the Tennessee Disability Act, and the Tennessee Human Rights Act; (10) violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1983, for infringing on her rights under the First Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause; and (11) discrimination due to her exercise of her right to communicate with elected public officials, in violation of Tennessee's Public Employee Political Freedom Act of 1980, Tennessee Code Annotated § 8-50-603.
The State filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that it was entitled to Eleventh Amendment immunity for Cook's claims under the ADA, ADEA, FMLA, and Tennessee law. It also argued that Cook failed to state claims upon which relief could be granted under the FMLA, § 1983, and Title VII. Cook conceded that her § 1983 claims were barred, so the district court dismissed those claims. It also dismissed Cook's claims arising under the ADA, the FMLA, the ADEA, and state law, finding that the State was entitled to immunity under the Eleventh Amendment. It allowed Cook's Title VII retaliation claim against the State to proceed. Garner then filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that she was entitled to qualified immunity. [*4] 
The defendants filed a joint motion for summary judgment. Cook clarified that only two claims—Count 4, alleging retaliation for exercising her rights under the FMLA and Count 10, alleging violations of § 1983—were directed against Garner and that she was suing Garner in her individual capacity only. The district court dismissed Cook's FMLA claim against Garner to the extent that Cook sought monetary relief, because "the FMLA bars suits for damages against state employees in their individual capacities," but allowed Cook to proceed on her FMLA retaliation claim against Garner to the extent that she sought equitable relief. The district court dismissed Cook's § 1983 equal-protection claim, finding that Cook's allegations of retaliation did not implicate the Equal Protection Clause. The district court found that Cook's First Amendment retaliation claim was partially barred by the statute of limitations and partially meritless, because Cook failed to show that she engaged in speech that was protected by the First Amendment. The district court granted summary judgment in the State's favor on Cook's Title VII retaliation claim, finding that Cook failed to prove "that either of the defendants took action against her that can be deemed 'adverse'" and that [*5]  Cook failed to show a causal connection between her protected conduct and any adverse action. Following this order, only Cook's FMLA retaliation claim against Garner remained.
Garner filed a second motion to dismiss the amended complaint, arguing that Cook failed to state a claim of retaliation under the FMLA, because the alleged retaliatory acts did not rise to the level of an adverse employment action. The district court converted Garner's motion into a motion for summary judgment and gave the parties additional time to file supplemental materials. It eventually granted summary judgment in Garner's favor, finding that Cook failed to show that she suffered an adverse action.
On appeal, Cook argues that her coworkers, "management" and the "TSEA attorney" have retaliated against her and harassed her. She contends that her applications for employment in other State departments were denied and that she was terminated from her employment with DHS in April 2018. Cook states that she wants us to apply "retaliation laws," "harassment/hostile environment law," Title I of the ADA, "Title V, Section 503 of the Act," and Title VII. Finally, Cook argues that the Attorney General of Tennessee should be representing [*6]  her, not the defendants.
Cook has forfeited appellate review of the claims that she set forth in Counts 2, 3, 10, and 11 of her amended complaint by failing to discuss—or even mention—those claims in her appellate brief. Arguably, she has preserved the ADA claim raised in Count 1 of her amended complaint and the retaliation claims raised in Counts 4 through 9 of her amended complaint, although she presents no substantive arguments addressing the district court's findings. Because Cook is proceeding pro se and her appellate brief must be interpreted leniently, we will presume that Cook's mention of the ADA, retaliation and "retaliation laws" is sufficient to preserve these claims. See Haines v. Kerner, 404 U.S. 519, 520, 92 S. Ct. 594, 30 L. Ed. 2d 652 (1972) (per curiam). Finally, although Cook's appellate brief alleges harassment, her amended complaint did not set forth a hostile-work-environment claim, and Cook may not raise such a claim for the first time on appeal. See United States v. Ellison, 462 F.3d 557, 560 (6th Cir. 2006).
We review de novo a district court's dismissal under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). Winget v. JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., 537 F.3d 565, 572 (6th Cir. 2008). To avoid dismissal for failure to state a claim, "a complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007)). "A claim has facial plausibility when [*7]  the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Id. We also review de novo a district court's grant of summary judgment. Latits v. Phillips, 878 F.3d 541, 547 (6th Cir. 2017). "Summary judgment is appropriate if the materials in the record," when viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, "show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id.
As noted previously, Cook has preserved for appellate review only the ADA claim raised in Count 1 of her amended complaint and the retaliation claims raised in Counts 4 through 9. Of those preserved claims, the district court found that only Count 4—Cook's FMLA retaliation claim—was brought against Garner personally. Cook does not challenge that finding. The district court found that the State was entitled to Eleventh Amendment immunity with respect to the ADA failure-to-accommodate claim raised in Count 1 and the retaliation claims that she raised under the FMLA, the ADEA, the ADA, and Tennessee law. The Eleventh Amendment "bars all suits, whether for injunctive, declaratory or monetary relief, against the state and its departments." Thiokol Corp. v. Dep't of Treasury, 987 F.2d 376, 381 (6th Cir. 1993). There are [*8]  two exceptions to this immunity: "1) where a state has itself waived its immunity from federal suit; and 2) where Congress has abrogated the states' immunity." Id.
The State has not waived its immunity, and Congress has not abrogated the states' sovereign immunity with respect to claims arising under Title I of the ADA (failure to accommodate) or the ADEA. Whitfield v. Tennessee, 639 F.3d 253, 257 (6th Cir. 2011) (citing Bd. of Trs. of Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356, 374, 121 S. Ct. 955, 148 L. Ed. 2d 866 (2001)) (ADA Title I); Latham v. Office of Attorney Gen., 395 F.3d 261, 270 (6th Cir. 2005) (citing Kimel v. Fla. Bd. of Regents, 528 U.S. 62, 91, 120 S. Ct. 631, 145 L. Ed. 2d 522 (2000)) (ADEA). Cook's FMLA claim and her retaliation claim brought under Title V of the ADEA require further discussion. While Congress validly abrogated state sovereign immunity under the FMLA's family-care leave provision, see Nev. Dep't of Human Res. v. Hibbs, 538 U.S. 721, 727-40, 123 S. Ct. 1972, 155 L. Ed. 2d 953 (2003), it did not do so with respect to the FMLA's personal-care provision, see Touvell v. Ohio Dep't of Mental Retardation & Developmental Disabilities, 422 F.3d 392, 400 (6th Cir. 2005). Because it is apparent from the allegations in Cook's complaint that she was claiming retaliation based on her use of personal-care FMLA leave, rather than family-care leave, the district court correctly concluded that the State was entitled to absolute immunity under the Eleventh Amendment. Additionally, the district court properly held that Cook's state-law claims against the State were barred by the Eleventh Amendment. See VIBO Corp. v. Conway, 669 F.3d 675, 691 (6th Cir. 2012) ("The Eleventh Amendment to the U.S. Constitution grants immunity to states from litigation on state law claims in federal court.").
With respect to Cook's ADA [*9]  retaliation claim, neither we nor the Supreme Court has decided whether Title V of the ADA abrogates state sovereign immunity. Even if the ADA retaliation claim is considered on the merits, however, the State prevails. Because we may affirm the district court's judgment on any ground supported by the record, it is unnecessary to decide whether the State was entitled to qualified immunity on this claim. See United States ex rel. Harper v. Muskingum Watershed Conservancy Dist., 842 F.3d 430, 435 (6th Cir. 2016).
Cook's remaining claims are her ADA retaliation claim against the State, her Title VII retaliation claim against the State, and her FMLA retaliation claim against both Garner and the State. The ADA states that "[n]o person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). Retaliation claims brought under the ADA are analyzed in the same manner as retaliation claims brought under Title VII. Penny v. UPS, 128 F.3d 408, 417 (6th Cir. 1997). "To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must show: (1) that [s]he engaged in protected activity; (2) that [s]he suffered [an] adverse employment [*10]  action; and (3) that a causal connection existed between the protected activity and the adverse action." Id.
With respect to her ADA claim, Cook submitted evidence showing that, on April 19, 2015, she filed a complaint with the Tennessee Human Rights Commission complaining, in part, that the State had failed to provide reasonable accommodations for her disability. On May 4, 2015, she submitted to her employer a request to be accommodated for her health condition by being transferred back to a position in the state office building. On May 7, 2015, she filed an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission charge alleging, in part, that the defendants "refused to provide [her] with a reasonable accommodation." However, Cook was transferred to the Davidson County office in December of 2014. Thus, Cook's transfer to the Davidson County office could not be considered an adverse action taken in response to this protected conduct, because the transfer preceded the protected conduct.
During her deposition, Cook alleged that her applications for other positions within the State government were rejected and that, for a time, she was locked out of the State's online application system. But evidence shows [*11]  that Cook was locked out of the application system due to a discrepancy in one of her applications and that her account was unlocked on or around March 17, 2015—before she filed her accommodation request. Cook also submitted no evidence to support her claim that the defendants prevented her from obtaining another position within the State government, and she admitted during her deposition that she "had no idea" and could "only speculate" about who was responsible for her failure to obtain another position. Cook also alleged during her deposition that her pay and leave records were altered. But although she produced some evidence of a dispute regarding her accrued leave, these disputes occurred in 2010 and 2011, well before Cook engaged in conduct protected under the ADA.
For purposes of Title VII, the district court found that "[t]he only instance of protected conduct in play here is the 2010 . . . filing [with the Tennessee Human Rights Commission]." That complaint was filed on July 13, 2010. The district court also found that "[t]he only alleged adverse action properly before the Court is the transfer to the Davidson County office, interference with Cook's employment search, and alleged [*12]  . . . adjustments to her pay and leave records." Cook does not challenge these findings, although she does state in her appellate brief that her employment with DHS was terminated in April 2018. As the district court pointed out, however, Cook never amended her complaint to allege that the termination of her employment was the result of discrimination or retaliation.
The district court properly concluded that Cook's transfer to the Davidson County office did not qualify as an adverse employment action. The transfer did not result in a change to Cook's job title, job classification, general job responsibilities, salary, or employment benefits. Cook was initially offered a position in the Rutherford County office because it was the closest office to her home, but when she complained that she wanted to remain closer to Nashville, she was offered a position with the Davidson County office. Cook admitted that she did not have to interact with clients at the Davidson County office, but she complained that she sometimes had to walk into the lobby, where numerous clients would be waiting, that the county office was "not a professional environment," and, in her opinion, the transfer was "degrading" [*13]  and "a demotion." For a transfer to be considered an adverse employment action, a plaintiff must show, "[a]t a minimum, . . . a quantitative or qualitative change in the terms of the conditions of employment." Deleon v. Kalamazoo Cty. Rd. Comm'n, 739 F.3d 914, 919 (6th Cir. 2014). Cook merely relies on her own subjective perceptions of the county position. Because she did not identify any "circumstances . . . giv[ing] rise to some level of objective intolerability," she failed to show that the transfer constituted an adverse employment action. Id. (emphasis added).
Finally, Cook contended in her deposition that her pay and leave records had been altered. The record does show that Cook was subject to leave restrictions in January 2010, due to tardiness and an excessive use of leave. Cook filed an informal complaint about this on February 11, 2010. This dispute occurred before Cook filed her complaint with the Tennessee Human Rights Commission in July 2010 and, therefore, could not have been caused by the filing of her complaint.
There also appears to have been a dispute about Cook's leave calculations in April and May 2011. But the evidence that Cook submitted does not show that her leave records were altered; they merely show that Cook had questioned the [*14]  State's calculation of her leave. In any event, Cook offered no proof of a causal connection between the filing of her July 2010 complaint and the leave dispute nine months later. This temporal proximity alone is insufficient to establish a causal connection. See Tennial v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 840 F.3d 292, 309 (6th Cir. 2016).
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the FMLA, a plaintiff must show that:
(1) [s]he engaged in an activity protected by the Act, (2) this exercise of h[er] protected rights was known to the defendant, (3) the defendant thereafter took an employment action adverse to the plaintiff, and (4) there was a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action.
Id. at 308. Like the ADA and Title VII, a retaliation claim under the FMLA requires a plaintiff to show that she suffered an adverse employment action. For reasons discussed above, the district court properly concluded that Cook failed to show that her transfer to the Davidson County office, her failure to obtain other employment, and the calculation of her leave balances constituted adverse actions. The defendants were therefore entitled to summary judgment on this claim.
Finally, Cook argues on appeal that Tennessee's Attorney General should [*15]  be representing her, not the defendants. But Cook is suing the State of Tennessee, and it is the Attorney General's responsibility to "defend . . . any and all suits . . . in which suit or suits the state may be a party." Tenn. Code Ann. § 8-6-110.
For the foregoing reasons, we AFFIRM the district court's judgment.
Concur by: LARSEN  
Concur




LARSEN, Circuit Judge, concurring in the judgment. Pro se litigants enjoy relaxed standards, but even they "must still brief the issues advanced with some effort at developed argumentation." King v. Hosp. Corp. of Am., 381 F. App'x 577, 579 (6th Cir. 2010) (quoting Coleman v. Shoney's Inc., 79 F. App'x 155, 157 (6th Cir. 2003)). Cook's briefing does not meet even this relaxed standard. She merely lists laws that she wishes us to apply, with no attempt at developing any sort of argument based on those laws. She has therefore forfeited her arguments, and for this reason alone, I would affirm the judgment of the district court.

 

End of Document
