.
The proposed amendment would change the constitutional status quo in at least two significant ways. First, it would mandate an all-candidate, all-voter top-two primary election for the legislature, governor, and cabinet. Second, by mandating "a single primary election" for each office, it would take away the Legislature's discretion to provide for state-run elections to choose political party nominees for those offices. The ballot summary here discloses the first change, but not the second. In fact, the ballot summary does not even hint at the second change, which would upend voter expectations by prohibiting an election practice that has prevailed in our state for over a century. In a related way, the ballot summary is affirmatively misleading. It leads voters to believe that party-nominated candidates would necessarily be a feature of the primary election scheme under the proposed amendment. But the proposed amendment itself neither requires  nor assumes the existence of such candidates. These defects in the ballot summary are fatal under section 101.161(1), Florida Statutes (2019), and I therefore respectfully dissent from the majority's decision to approve the proposed amendment for placement on the ballot.
 Section 101.161(1) requires the ballot summary to disclose the proposed amendment's material legal effects.
The relevant part of section 101.161(1) says that the ballot summary must be "an explanatory statement, not exceeding 75 words in length, of the chief purpose of the measure." The statute does not define any of the key terms: explanatory, chief, and purpose. Therefore, we must give those terms their ordinary meaning, informed by the context in which they appear.
Although it is central to the requirements of section 101.161(1), the word "purpose" as used in this context does not have an obvious meaning. After all, "[a]ny provision of law or of private ordering can be said to have a number of purposes, which can be placed on a ladder of abstraction." Antonin Scalia & Bryan A. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts 18 (2012). And "nearly every end is a means to another end." Max Radin, Statutory Interpretation, 43 Harv. L. Rev. 863, 876 (1930).
Recognizing this difficulty, courts have distinguished between a law's "ultimate purpose" and its "immediate purpose." See, e.g., Jam v. Int'l Fin. Corp., 139 S. Ct. 759, 769, 203 L. Ed. 2d 53 (2019). A law's ultimate purpose is remote, relatively abstract, and often contestable. By contrast, a law's immediate purpose can be derived from the words of the statute itself. See id. Put differently, a statute's immediate purpose consists of the specific means by which the statute pursues its more remote objectives or goals. See Radin, supra at 877. The closest dictionary definition for immediate purpose is the one that defines "purpose" as "effect or result . . . attained." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1847 (1993). There are several reasons why section 101.161(1) is best understood as using the word purpose in the sense of immediate purpose.
Only a measure's immediate purpose—the specific changes it would make to the constitutional text—can be determined objectively. The more remote the statement of a measure's purpose, the more subjective (and debatable) that purpose becomes. Textually, section 101.161(1) requires a statement of the purpose "of the measure." But as one moves up the ladder of abstraction, the focus inevitably shifts to the subjective purpose of the sponsor in proposing the measure.
The very nature of a ballot demands objectivity in the presentation of a measure's purpose. A ballot puts before the voter a choice. To make an informed decision, the voter must know how a measure would amend the constitution; the why behind a measure is far less relevant, if relevant at all. Stating a measure's more abstract purpose—as opposed to its immediate purpose—can get too close to advocacy, which has no place on a ballot. "Ballots serve primarily to elect candidates"—or, in this context, to approve or disapprove proposed constitutional amendments—"not as forums for political expression." Timmons v. Twin Cities Area New Party, 520 U.S. 351, 363, 117 S. Ct. 1364, 137 L. Ed. 2d 589 (1997).
Finally, by consistently equating purpose in the context of section 101.161(1) with legal effect, this Court's case law reflects an implicit understanding that the statute refers to immediate purpose. The Legislature adopted section 101.161(1)'s "chief purpose" requirement for ballot summaries in 1980. Ch. 80-304, 2, Laws of  Fla. Soon thereafter, in Askew v. Firestone, 421 So. 2d 151 (1982), we analyzed a ballot summary in terms of whether it accurately presented "the amendment's chief effect." Id. at 155. Two years later, we said that "[t]he ballot summary should tell the voter the legal effect of the amendment, and no more." Evans v. Firestone, 457 So. 2d 1351, 1355 (Fla. 1984). Jumping ahead several decades, we said in one of our most recent ballot initiative cases that we determine a proposed amendment's purpose by looking at "objective criteria inherent in the amendment itself, such as the amendment's main effect." Advisory Op. to Att'y Gen. re Citizenship Requirement to Vote in Fla. Elections, 288 So. 3d 524, 45 Fla. L. Weekly S7, S8 (Fla. Jan. 16, 2020) (citation omitted).
Having established that the word "purpose" in section 101.161(1) means immediate purpose or legal effect, it remains necessary to determine what the statute means by "chief purpose." (Emphasis added.) In this context, "chief" has to mean "marked by greatest importance, significance, influence." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 387 (1993). This introduces a concept of materiality. As our cases have repeatedly observed, a ballot summary "need not discuss every detail or consequence of the amendment." Advisory Op. to Att'y Gen. re Raising Florida's Minimum Wage, 285 So. 3d 1273, 1277 (Fla. 2019) (citation omitted). Instead, the legislature's use of the phrase "chief purpose" means that the ballot summary must set forth the legal effects that would be material to an objectively reasonable voter. See Dep't of State v. Fla. Greyhound Ass'n, 253 So. 3d 513, 520 (Fla. 2018) (a ballot summary that fails to inform the voter of an amendment's "material effects" is defective).
Section 101.161(1) refers to "the chief purpose," singular, of the measure. Does this mean that the author of a ballot summary must determine a proposed amendment's discrete legal effects and then set forth only the most important one in the ballot summary? That would be an unreasonable interpretation of the statute. We have consistently held that article XI, section 3 allows a proposed amendment to contain multiple components, so long as those components are "parts or aspects of a single dominant plan or scheme." Advisory Op. to the Att'y Gen. re Rights of Electricity Consumers Regarding Solar Energy Choice, 188 So. 3d 822, 828 (Fla. 2016). If the constitution permits multi-component (but single subject) proposals, it makes the most sense to read section 101.161(1) as requiring the ballot summary to identify all material components of the overall plan. This reading is consistent with the statutory text. The immediate purpose of a proposed amendment is to enact a bundle of related legal effects. Therefore, the "chief purpose" of the amendment can be understood in terms of the subset of those legal effects that would be material to a reasonable voter.
Finally, section 101.161(1) says that the ballot summary must be an "explanatory" statement, and that the summary must be printed on the ballot "in clear and unambiguous language." To explain means "to make manifest; present in detail," or "to make plain or understandable." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 801 (1993). A ballot summary cannot be explanatory, and its language cannot be clear and unambiguous, unless it makes understandable to the voter the material legal effects of the proposed amendment.2 
  The ballot summary fails to disclose that, by mandating a "single primary election," the proposed amendment would prohibit state-run elections to select political party nominees for the affected offices.
The ballot summary in this case violates section 101.161(1) because it completely fails to identify—much less explain—a material legal effect of the proposed amendment. Since 1913, the Legislature has exercised its discretion to require that political party nominees for the legislature, governor, and cabinet be elected in state-run primary elections. Long ago we explained: "[B]ecause of the public importance of securing proper party nominations, the regulation of party primary elections, and the institution of official state-controlled primaries to be conducted and held at public expense, and under the eye of public officials, are universally held to be proper subjects for legislative action." State ex rel. Andrews v. Gray, 125 Fla. 1, 169 So. 501, 505 (Fla. 1936). For Florida voters who are members of political parties—which is to say, a strong majority of voters—the century-old tradition of electing party nominees in state-run primary elections is an essential aspect of participation in the electoral process. It is not an exaggeration to say that Floridians likely consider voting in such elections to be their right.
The proposed amendment would take away the Legislature's discretion to provide for these state-run party nominating elections for the affected offices. This legal effect is evident from the plain meaning of the proposed amendment's text. That text opens with the statement: "All elections for the Florida legislature, governor and cabinet shall be held as follows." (Emphasis added.) And the text goes on to say: "A single primary election shall be held for each office." (Emphasis added.) "Single" means one. And it is self-evident that the proposed amendment does not use the phrase "primary election" to mean an election to select a political party's nominee for the general election. Rather, the proposed amendment uses "primary election" the way the dictionary generically defines the phrase: "an election in which qualified voters nominate or express a preference for a particular candidate or group of candidates for political office." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1800 (1993). "Primary" being a relative term, under the proposed amendment a "primary election" is simply an election before the general election. Cf. Advisory Op. to the Governor re Implementation of Amendment 4, the Voting Restoration Amendment, 288 So. 3d 1070, 2020 Fla. LEXIS 70, *29, 45 Fla. L. Weekly S10, S14 (Fla. Jan. 16, 2020) (absent contextual indication of technical meaning, words in the constitution should be interpreted in their "plain, common sense").
Taken as a whole, the clause "[a] single primary election shall be held for each office" must mean that the state may hold only one election before the general election at which the listed offices will be voted on. That "single primary election" is necessarily the all-voter, all-candidate primary election that the proposed amendment seeks to bring to life. Any other state-run election before the general election would be an additional, constitutionally prohibited primary election.3 
 The ballot summary does not come close to disclosing this legal effect, even though it would change the constitution in a way that meets any reasonable definition of materiality. The ballot summary does not tell the voters that the proposed amendment mandates "a single primary election" for the affected offices. A reader of the ballot summary would have no way of knowing that the all-voter, all-candidate primary described in the summary would be the state's constitutionally exclusive primary election for those offices.
This proposed change to the constitutional status quo—a status quo that has allowed the Legislature for over 100 years to mandate state-run elections to select political party nominees—is not a mere detail. The proposed amendment would make the selection of political party nominees for the affected offices a private affair, subject to each party's discretion. Given the expense and the logistical complexity of conducting a statewide election in our large and diverse state, no substitute, party-run nomination process is likely to resemble our existing state-run elections. And any objectively reasonable voter would consider this change a material legal effect of the proposed amendment.
 The ballot summary is affirmatively misleading.
This brings us to a closely related way in which the ballot summary is actually affirmatively misleading. The first sentence of section 4 in the proposed amendment reads: "Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a political party from nominating a candidate to run for office under this subsection." Read together with the remainder of the proposed amendment, this sentence confirms that, going forward, political parties' nomination of candidates for the affected offices would be a private affair, neither required nor prohibited by the proposed amendment. It is impossible to know whether, if the proposed amendment were to become law, any political party would continue to nominate candidates for the legislature, governor, and cabinet. (For that matter, given the mandatory all-voter, all-candidate primary, it is equally impossible to know what such a "nomination" would mean in practice and effect.)
Contradicting the text of the proposed amendment, the ballot summary expressly assumes that there will continue to be party-nominated candidates for these offices. Specifically, the summary says: "All candidates for an office, including party nominated candidates, appear on the same primary ballot." (Emphasis added.) In fact, as explained, party-nominated candidates are not a necessary feature of the election scheme under the proposed amendment. Absent qualifying language, the ballot summary's reference to "party nominated candidates" is affirmatively misleading.
Finally, the ballot title and summary mislead in yet another way. The ballot title announces: "All Voters Vote in Primary Elections for State Legislature, Governor, and Cabinet." The opening line of the ballot summary says: "Allows all registered voters to vote in primaries . . . regardless of political party affiliation." This repeated  "all voters vote" theme signals to voters that the proposed amendment would expand access to voting, and that is partly true. But the "all voters vote" language makes it less likely that voters will perceive that the proposed amendment would contract access to voting in a separate, critical respect.
 Conclusion
The ballot summary here is clearly defective under section 101.161(1). The summary's flaw is not that it fails to speculate about what candidate nominating processes, if any, the political parties might adopt to replace state-run primary elections—section 101.161(1) prohibits such speculation. The summary's flaw is not that it fails to identify the proposed amendment's every detail and ramification—section 101.161(1) does not require that either. The summary's flaw is not in the merits of the underlying amendment—our state's existing election practices, however longstanding, are not entitled to any special protection from this Court. The ballot summary here is fatally flawed because it does not explain a known, material legal effect of the proposed amendment: the enactment of a constitutional prohibition on state-run primary elections to select political party nominees for legislature, governor, and cabinet. And the ballot summary is defective for the additional reason that it affirmatively misleads voters by representing that political party nominees are a necessary feature of the proposed amendment's election scheme, when that is not the case. I respectfully dissent.

 

