.
I respectfully dissent, because I believe we lack jurisdiction to decide this case. The majority bases jurisdiction on an asserted conflict between the First District's decision in this case and this Court's decisions in Bridier v. Burns, 148 Fla. 587, 4 So. 2d 853 (Fla. 1941), and Macfarlane v. Macfarlane, 50 Fla. 570, 39 So. 995 (Fla. 1905). For there to be conflict jurisdiction, however, our constitution requires that the decision under review expressly and directly conflict with a "decision" of a different district court or of this Court "on the same question of law." Art. V, § 3(b)(3), Fla. Const. It follows from the structure of article V that each of the assertedly conflicting decisions must be one with precedential value on the relevant question of law. I do not believe that this test is satisfied here.
The question of law that the First District decided in LaSalle Bank is whether the circuit court exceeded its jurisdiction by "considering a motion for damages due to betterment that a third party purchaser filed against [LaSalle] after the circuit court entered a final judgment of foreclosure in [LaSalle's] favor." LaSalle Bank v. Griffin, 248 So. 3d 191, 191 (Fla. 1st DCA 2018). The First District concluded that the circuit court had, in fact, exceeded its jurisdiction by proceeding on the motion. The majority finds conflict with language in Bridier and Macfarlane indicating that, in proceedings following vacatur of a foreclosure sale, a trial court could resolve issues like the one raised by the third-party purchaser here. See Bridier, 4 So. 2d at 855 (directing chancellor to determine credits and debits accrued since vacated foreclosure sale); Macfarlane, 39 So. at 998 (remanding to chancellor for accounting of credits and debits due purchaser after vacated foreclosure sale).
Unlike the First District in LaSalle Bank, however, this Court in Bridier and Macfarlane did not render a decision on the jurisdictional issue that this case squarely presents—at least not a decision with any precedential value. Instead, in those cases this Court simply assumed that the trial court had the requisite jurisdiction on remand. The jurisdictional issue was not a focus of those cases; there is no indication on the face of our opinions that the trial court's jurisdiction was in dispute or that our Court gave the issue deliberate consideration. As a result, in my view, Bridier and Macfarlane have no precedential value on the asserted conflict issue. Cf. United States v. L. A. Tucker Truck Lines, Inc., 344 U.S. 33, 38, 73 S. Ct. 67, 97 L. Ed. 54 (1952) ("Even as to our own judicial power or jurisdiction, this Court has followed the lead of Chief Justice Marshall who held that this Court is not bound by a prior exercise of jurisdiction in a case where it was not questioned and it was passed sub silentio.").
We long ago recognized that a "limitation of review to decisions in 'direct conflict' clearly evinces a concern with decisions as precedents as opposed to adjudications of the rights of particular litigants." Ansin v. Thurston, 101 So. 2d 808, 811 (Fla. 1958). This emphasis on the precedential value of decisions respects the structure of Article V, which makes the district courts of appeal the final stop in most cases and gives this Court discretionary conflict jurisdiction to ensure harmony in the law. In the absence of a conflict of decisions with precedential value, there is nothing of significance to harmonize.
Under these circumstances, I respectfully conclude that we lack jurisdiction to review the First District's decision in this case.

 

