 with an opinion, in which CANADY, C.J., and LAWSON and LUCK, JJ., concur.
LABARGA, J., concurs in result only with an opinion.
Concur by: muniz; LABARGA  
Concur




muniz, J., concurring.
I concur in the majority opinion but write briefly to address the claim at the heart of Sheriff Israel's petition, i.e., the assertion that the factual allegations underlying the suspension order are disconnected from Israel's statutory duties. Israel's view of those duties is far too narrow. Section 30.15(1)(e), Florida Statutes (2018), makes sheriffs "in person or by deputy" the "conservators of the peace" in their respective counties. Relatedly, section 30.07, Florida Statutes (2018), authorizes sheriffs to appoint deputies and makes sheriffs responsible for the deputies' neglect in office. A sheriff's myriad day-to-day functions and responsibilities—including the development of policies and the training and supervision of employees—are the essential means of carrying out these overarching statutory obligations. And it requires no imagination to see the connection between these obligations and the significant performance deficiencies alleged in Executive Order 19-14. Of course, Israel is free to dispute the merits of the suspension order's factual allegations and to argue about the proper role of a governor in supervising local officials. But the appropriate forum for those debates is the Senate. It is not this Court's role to weigh the sufficiency of the evidence or to second-guess the governor's exercise of a discretionary function under the Constitution.
CANADY, C.J., and LAWSON and LUCK, JJ., concur.
LABARGA, J., concurring in result only.
As the circuit court correctly noted in its order, this case presents the narrow question  of whether the executive order suspending Sheriff Israel alleges facts sufficient to support the suspension on the stated grounds. While I agree that Executive Order 19-14 fulfills this requirement, I write to emphasize that our review of these matters is not pro forma. Indeed, executive orders suspending officials pursuant to article IV, section 7(a), of the Florida Constitution must allege specific, detailed facts which support and allow for meaningful review by the Senate. This requirement, in my view, is of paramount importance when the official in question was duly elected by the voters.2  Furthermore, the suspension order must provide the official in question with sufficient notice of the allegations to allow the official to mount a meaningful defense.
This Court noted in State ex rel. Hardee v. Allen, 126 Fla. 878, 172 So. 222, 224 (Fla. 1937), that "[i]t is not necessary that the allegation[s] of fact be as specific as the allegations of an indictment or information in a criminal prosecution." The allegations must, however, identify the specific instances of alleged misconduct with sufficient detail to facilitate meaningful review by the Senate, by this Court when applicable, and to allow the official to mount a defense. An executive order which presents only general or conclusory allegations will not suffice. This is not a demanding standard, but it is nonetheless a substantive requirement imposed by the Florida Constitution, and this Court is obligated to vacate any suspension which does not satisfy it.

 

