 in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
Although I agree that the search warrant was overbroad, I cannot agree that the arrest warrant lacked probable cause. The facts alleged in the affidavit supported the inference that Chief Armijo diverted Columbus funds to finance a private firearms purchase. In light of the deference we owe to the issuing judge's probable cause determination, we should reverse the district court's denial of summary judgment on Armijo's unlawful arrest and retaliatory prosecution claims.
 A. Unlawful Arrest  
1. Legal Standards
In determining whether an arrest warrant is supported by probable cause, we examine the warrant "merely to determine whether the [issuing judge] had a substantial basis to support an independent judgment that probable cause existed." St. John v. Justmann, 771 F.2d 445, 448 (10th Cir. 1985). Probable cause means only "a substantial probability that a crime has been committed and that a specific individual committed the crime." Id. Although "[w]e review the district court's ruling on the sufficiency of the warrant de novo, . . . we pay great deference to the [issuing judge's] probable cause determination." Poolaw v. Marcantel, 565 F.3d 721, 728 (10th Cir. 2009). This deference is rooted in "practical" concerns; warrants
are normally drafted by nonlawyers in the midst and haste of a criminal investigation. Technical requirements of elaborate specificity . . . have no proper place in this area. A grudging or negative attitude by reviewing courts toward warrants will tend to discourage police officers from submitting their evidence to a judicial officer before acting.
United States v. Ventresca, 380 U.S. 102, 108, 85 S. Ct. 741, 13 L. Ed. 2d 684 (1965); see also Poolaw, 565 F.3d at 741 ("The question is not whether seeking (or issuing) the search warrant was wrong, but whether it was unreasonable to do so."). In reviewing a warrant, however, "we look not only to the facts supporting probable cause, but also to those that militate against it." United States v. Valenzuela, 365 F.3d 892, 897 (10th Cir. 2004).
 2. The Affidavit
Although the majority references some of the facts alleged in the arrest warrant affidavit, they are worth revisiting in further detail. As the majority notes, two  relevant documents—the D&M Sporting Goods bid sheet, and the police department purchase order—conflicted regarding the number of guns to be purchased and the amount to be paid. The bid sheet listed six guns for $3,144 ($524 per gun), and the purchase order specified four guns for $2,360 ($590 per gun).
The majority also notes the statement of Officer Bolduc that "Chief Armijo had purchased one [of] the firearms for personal use and one to give to his father-in-law." App. at 361. Although the majority, following the district court, infers from this statement that Armijo purchased these two firearms with his own money, the statement itself does not say that. The investigating officers believed the guns were purchased with city funds. For obvious reasons, a larceny suspect's assertion that he acquired property legally does not defeat probable cause.
Finally, the majority neglects to mention one other piece of evidence in the affidavit: a signed letter from Armijo to D&M Sporting Goods which stated "that the six (6) firearms would be used for the Village of Columbus." App. at 361. The letter does not disclose that two of the weapons were bound for Armijo's private arsenal.
 3. Discussion
In my view, the facts described above provided a "substantial basis" for the issuing judge to find "a substantial probability that a crime ha[d] been committed" by Armijo. St. John, 771 F.2d at 448.
Armijo's arrest warrant listed the offenses of larceny of a firearm and embezzlement. "To the extent probable cause exists for any one of these charges, the arrest was lawful and our analysis is complete." Lyons v. City of Xenia, 417 F.3d 565, 573 (6th Cir. 2005). New Mexico defines larceny as "stealing anything of value that belongs to another." N.M. Stat. Ann. § 30-16-1(A). Larceny of a firearm is a subset of larceny with an enhanced penalty. See § 30-16-1(H). Embezzlement is defined as "a person embezzling or converting to the person's own use anything of value, with which the person has been entrusted, with fraudulent intent to deprive the owner thereof." § 30-16-8(A). The embezzlement charge against Armijo, unlike the larceny charge, was not firearm-specific.
The purchase order showed that the city paid $2,360 to D&M Sporting Goods for four guns, or $590 per gun. But the bid sheet specified $3,144 for six guns, and it is uncontested that Armijo in fact received six guns, transferring four to the city and keeping two for himself. A rational inference is that Armijo only paid out of his own pocket the difference between $3,144 and $2,360—that is, $784. That amounts to $392 per gun, which is $198 per gun less than the city paid. A reasonable conclusion is that Armijo intentionally used city funds to subsidize his own private purchase of firearms, thereby committing embezzlement.
Perhaps there was a perfectly innocent reason why Armijo received a much lower price. But why, then, the letter to D&M Sporting Goods explicitly representing that all six weapons were for municipal use? One reasonable explanation is that Armijo was deliberately lying to D&M Sporting Goods in order to hide his scheme. This inference strengthens the likelihood of criminal activity.
These facts likely would be insufficient to prove Armijo committed a crime. But "probable cause requires 'a probability or substantial chance of criminal activity, not an actual showing of such activity.'" United States v. Biglow, 562 F.3d 1272, 1283 n.3 (10th Cir. 2009) (quoting New York v.  P.J. Video, Inc., 475 U.S. 868, 877-78, 106 S. Ct. 1610, 89 L. Ed. 2d 871 (1986)).
The majority believes we cannot uphold the issuing judge's probable cause determination without piling inference on inference. I disagree. The critical question is whether, in light of all the facts alleged, the inference is a reasonable one.
The majority suggests that the warrant should have alleged that Armijo diverted city funds to finance a private firearms purchase. The government, of course, did not know for a fact that Armijo committed the charged crimes; nor was it required to. The role of an affidavit is to allege facts, not inferences, and the facts it did allege support the conclusion that Armijo used city funds to subsidize his purchase. The only real inference is why Armijo got a better deal. In combination with the evidence showing a discrepancy between what Armijo told D&M Sporting Goods and what he requested from the city, the issuing judge had reason to infer a substantial probability of unlawful conduct.
 B. Retaliatory Prosecution
My conclusion regarding the lawfulness of Armijo's arrest necessitates my dissent on the issue of retaliatory prosecution.
A plaintiff bringing a claim of retaliatory prosecution is required to plead and prove, as an element of the claim, the absence of probable cause. Hartman v. Moore, 547 U.S. 250, 265-66, 126 S. Ct. 1695, 164 L. Ed. 2d 441 (2006); see also Reichle v. Howards, 132 S. Ct. 2088, 2095, 182 L. Ed. 2d 985 (2012) (reaffirming Hartman). This is because retaliatory prosecution (as opposed to retaliatory arrest) involves a "complex" causal chain between the government official harboring the retaliatory animus and the officer who carries out the retaliatory action. Hartman, 547 U.S. at 261. "Accordingly, the significance of probable cause or the lack of it looms large, being a potential feature of every case." Id. at 265. Combined with the "presumption of regularity behind the charging decision," the existence of probable cause defeats a retaliatory prosecution claim. Id. This is true even when the evidence of a retaliatory motive is quite significant. Cf. id. at 266 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting).
Here, Armijo was arrested pursuant to a valid warrant supported by probable cause. Thus, his retaliatory prosecution claim must fail.
 C. Search Warrant
I concur in the majority's conclusion that the search warrant was unconstitutionally overbroad, and that the right at issue was clearly established. My view differs slightly, in that I would find the warrant's authorization of a search for financial documents permissible based on the evidence pertaining to embezzlement. I nonetheless concur because, as the majority explains, the affidavit contained no arguable basis for a search for narcotics-related items, and the defendants did not raise a severability argument below.
* * *
For the reasons stated above, I would affirm the district court's denial of summary judgment on Armijo's unlawful search claim, but reverse with regard to the unlawful arrest and retaliatory prosecution claims.

 

