.
In my view, Mr. Benjamin has not "set forth evidence of a clear and convincing nature that, if believed by the ultimate factfinder, would establish that plaintiff was more likely than not the victim of illegal retaliation by [his] employer." See Macon v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 743 F.3d 708, 713 n.2 (10th Cir. 2014) (applying Kansas law) (emphasis added). This record does not contain sufficient evidence that Mr. Rolfs's decision to terminate Mr. Benjamin amounted to pretext designed to obscure an improper retaliatory motive.
The majority opinion primarily credits Mr. Benjamin's argument that Mr. Rolfs knew of the unprofessional and insubordinate conduct for which he was eventually fired before renewing his contract for the 2016-2017 academic year. In so doing, the majority assumes Mr. Benjamin's "whistleblower" report represented the only noteworthy development in his relationship with Mr. Rolfs during the 2016-2017 academic year. Largely for this reason, the majority opinion concludes a reasonable jury might determine that Mr. Rolfs "was aware of an issue, did nothing about that issue, then later terminated [Mr. Benjamin] for that earlier issue after the employee reported misconduct." Maj. Op. 10-11 (emphasis in original).
But the majority opinion fails to account for another important event during the 2016-2017 academic year. In October 2016, Mr. Benjamin met with the Director of Human Resources to express a wide range of concerns regarding his position within the Athletics Department. Most notably, Mr. Benjamin alleged that Mr. Rolfs had publicly inquired into his sexual orientation during a basketball game. The Director of Human Resources investigated this allegation, soliciting written recollections from both Mr. Rolfs and another witness identified by Mr. Benjamin. Both Mr. Rolfs and this second witness—another employee of the Athletics Department—repudiated Mr. Benjamin's allegations. The Director of Human Resources relayed to Mr. Benjamin that neither witness had corroborated his account.
In addition, the record indicates Mr. Benjamin gave voice to a litany of related grievances that had nothing to do with his "whistleblower" report shortly before he registered those concerns. He indicated that he was unhappy with his circumstances at Barton Community College, and he highlighted his poor relationship with Mr. Rolfs as a cause for significant concern. In light of these developments, I do not believe a reasonable jury could conclude the unprofessional and insubordinate conduct for which Mr. Benjamin was eventually terminated amounted to pretext.
Nor do I agree with the majority opinion's alternative conclusion that a reasonable jury might determine "the manner in which [Mr.] Rolfs conducted the termination demonstrates pretext." Maj. Op. 11. I would not infer a factual dispute solely from Mr. Benjamin's incomplete repudiation of the player and parent complaints solicited by Mr. Rolfs. When twice asked in his deposition whether he had accounted for one player's injuries in terms both racially and sexually charged, Mr. Benjamin responded only that he did not recall those remarks. And—again, in  his deposition—Mr. Benjamin conceded that he had commented on the sexual orientation of a different player during a tournament game. Both remarks strike me as plainly inappropriate.
Moreover, the accounts that aggrieved players and parents shared with Mr. Rolfs paint a uniformly negative picture of Mr. Benjamin. And the record discloses no evidence—beyond his bare assertions—that these individuals contrived their accounts out of some misplaced desire for revenge. Even if Mr. Benjamin were correct on this point, Mr. Rolfs could have credited these accounts—even if incorrectly—as a basis for termination. Cf. Young v. Dillon Cos., Inc., 468 F.3d 1243, 1250 (10th Cir. 2006) (Gorsuch, J.) (In the Title VII context, "the relevant 'falsity' inquiry is whether the employer's stated reasons were held in good faith at the time of the discharge, even if they later prove to be untrue.").
In sum, Mr. Benjamin has not carried his burden of developing clear and convincing evidence that a reasonable jury could credit to conclude he was fired for pretextual reasons.

 

