.
In my view, Ms. Contreras has failed not only to demonstrate the violation of a clearly established constitutional right, but also the violation of a constitutional right at all.
 I. Background
On the evening of May 3, 2016, A.L. was booked into the Doña Ana County Detention Center (DACDC) for violating terms associated with his probation. As A.L. was led to his cell, three other detainees—A.H., J.S., and J.V.—spontaneously began banging on their cell doors and yelling to A.L. that they "were gonna f**k him up."
In response, corrections officers placed all three aggressors on pre-disciplinary lockdown ("pre-disc"), which imposed a number of restrictions. While subject to pre-disc, A.H., J.S., and J.V. could only leave their cells for one of several enumerated purposes, and never at the same time. This regime also proscribed any contact with A.L. And it likewise sought to restrict communication among the three aggressors.
The next morning, Officer Casado, Cadet Platero, and Sergeant Luna were in the common area on the first floor of the juvenile pod. While A.L., J.S., and J.V. remained locked in separate cells on the second floor, A.H. obtained permission to  leave his cell for the permissible purpose of a shower. The shower room sat on the first floor, just adjacent to the common area.
Video indicates all three corrections officers watched television in the common area as A.H. finished his shower. Consistent with the restrictions imposed by A.H.'s pre-disc, no other detainee appeared outside of the locked cells. Upon exiting the shower room, A.H. entered the common area, which houses both the commissary kiosk and the touchscreen control panel. The record discloses that Officer Casado had left the control panel unlocked.
A.H. obtained permission from Sergeant Luna to use the commissary kiosk. But as he stands at the kiosk, the video suggests A.H. glances over his shoulder to check whether the corrections officers were paying attention. He then walks off-screen. Moments later, one of the corrections officers—evidently recognizing something amiss—stands suddenly as A.H. reappears onscreen. Around this same time, J.S. and J.V. flee their newly-unlocked cells.
They enter A.L.'s cell, closing the door behind them. J.S. and J.V. then begin assaulting A.L. As they do so, A.H. runs upstairs and locks himself inside his own cell, before Officer Casado can catch him. From downstairs, Cadet Platero re-opens A.L.'s cell. Sergeant Luna eventually subdues A.L.'s attackers with pepper spray. All of this transpires within twenty seconds.
 II. Analysis
Ms. Contreras contends the district court erred in concluding the corrections officers' behavior did not violate a clearly-established constitutional right to protection from violence.1 
We review de novo the district court's decision to grant summary judgment. E.g., Lindsey v. Hyler, 918 F.3d 1109, 1113 (10th Cir. 2019) (citing Trask v. Franco, 446 F.3d 1036, 1043 (10th Cir. 2006) ("On appeal, we review the award of summary judgment based on qualified immunity de novo.")). Summary judgment becomes appropriate when there exists no genuine dispute of material fact, such that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a)).
In conducting this exercise, we consider evidence and draw inferences in the manner most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. (citing Schutz v. Thorne, 415 F.3d 1128, 1132 (10th Cir. 2005)). But where, as here, a defendant asserts qualified immunity, the plaintiff must also demonstrate that (1) the defendant violated a constitutional right, and (2) the constitutional right was "clearly established" at the time the violation transpired. Id. (citing Medina v. Cram, 252 F. 3d 1124, 1128 (10th Cir. 2001)). Unless the plaintiff can satisfy both requirements, the defendant will prevail.
We examine each requirement in turn.
 A. Constitutional Violation
The Supreme Court has explained that "the treatment a prisoner receives . . . and the conditions under which he is confined are subject to scrutiny under the Eighth Amendment."2  Helling v. McKinney, 509 U.S. 25, 31, 113 S. Ct. 2475, 125 L. Ed. 2d 22 (1993). The Court has accordingly construed  the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against "cruel and unusual punishments" to encompass certain "restraints on prison officials." Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 832, 114 S. Ct. 1970, 128 L. Ed. 2d 811 (1994). For example, officials may not apply "excessive" physical force against inmates. Id. (citing Hudson v. McMillian, 503 U.S. 1, 112 S. Ct. 995, 117 L. Ed. 2d 156 (1992)).
The Supreme Court has likewise held that the Eighth Amendment imposes certain affirmative obligations upon prison officials. Among these obligations are provisions for "adequate food, clothing, shelter, and medical care." Id. (citing Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517, 526-27, 104 S. Ct. 3194, 82 L. Ed. 2d 393 (1984)). Most importantly for present purposes, the Court has held that prison officials "must take reasonable measures to guarantee the safety ofinmates []." Id. (citing same).
To the extent prison officials manifest deliberate indifference to any of these affirmative obligations, injured parties may seek redress under § 1983. E.g., Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97, 104-06, 97 S. Ct. 285, 50 L. Ed. 2d 251 (1976). But this cause of action does not imply that "every injury suffered by one prisoner at the hands of another will translate into constitutional liability for prison officials responsible for the victim's safety." Farmer, 511 U.S. at 834 (cleaned up).
To prevail on a constitutional claim for "deliberate indifference," a plaintiff must demonstrate both an objective and a subjective failure on the part of prison officials. Id; see also Smith v. Cummings, 445 F.3d 1254, 1258 (10th Cir. 2006) ("[T]he plaintiff must show that he is incarcerated under conditions posing a substantial risk of serious harm, the objective component, and that the prison official was deliberately indifferent to his safety, the subjective component.").
 1. Objective Inquiry
Where a § 1983 action is premised "on a failure to prevent harm, the inmate must show that he is incarcerated under conditions posing a substantial risk of serious harm." See id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted); see also Howard v. Waide, 534 F.3d 1227, 1236 (10th Cir. 2008) ("First, the alleged deprivation must be sufficiently serious under an objective standard. In cases involving a failure to prevent harm, this means that the prisoner must show that the conditions of his incarceration present an objective substantial risk of serious harm." (emphasis added) (citing Smith, 445 F.3d at 1258)).
And where the plaintiff alleges deliberate indifference to the threats inmates may pose to one another, he must demonstrate a connection between the conditions of incarceration and the substantial (and particularized) risk of serious harm. See, e.g., Verdecia v. Adams, 327 F.3d 1171, 1175 (10th Cir. 2003) ("To establish a cognizable Eighth Amendment claim for failure to protect [an inmate from harm by other inmates], the plaintiff must show that he [was] incarcerated under conditions posing a substantial risk of serious harm[,] the objective component . . .") (emphasis added) (citations and quotation marks omitted)).3 
 To the extent any cognizable risk arose from the circumstances the corrections officers faced in this case, it was the possibility that A.H., J.S., and J.V. might make good on their threats to assault A.L., if given the opportunity. The record, however, discloses that corrections officers separated the detainees from one another and from A.L. by imposing "pre-disc" requirements on A.H., J.S., and J.V. immediately upon their first and only threats to A.L. Corrections officers accordingly restricted the movements of A.H., J.S., and J.V., such that they were not permitted any contact with A.L., one another, or other detainees. Such defensive action on the part of the corrections officers cannot be characterized as objective disregard of substantial risk of serious harm.4 
It is, of course, true that—despite these precautions—Officer Casado left the control panel unlocked when A.H. exited his cell to shower. And that doing so—whether consciously or not, and whether A.H. knew the panel was unlocked or not—created some risk that A.H. might access the control panel, despite the presence of two additional corrections officers nearby and the absence of any other detainees in the common area.
It is likewise true these circumstances created some risk that A.H. might somehow coordinate with J.S. and J.V.—who were segregated from one another upstairs—to unlock A.L.'s cell. And that none of the three corrections officers present would intervene before some combination of A.H., J.S., and J.V. made good on their threats against A.L. In my view, however, this cascade of unlikely events should not overshadow the countervailing reality that corrections officers responded swiftly and decisively to the sole incidence of threats directed against A.L. by imposing "pre-disc" on A.H., J.S., and J.V.
Given the unlikelihood that A.H.—while subject to "pre-disc"—would successfully access the unlocked control panel in the presence of three corrections officers, I would describe the risk these circumstances posed to A.L. as attenuated, rather than substantial. I would accordingly conclude the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate the requisite substantial risk of serious harm to carry her burden under the objective component of our inquiry.
 2. Subjective Inquiry
I would also conclude the corrections officers lacked awareness of the facts necessary to infer subjective knowledge of this risk. Our subjective inquiry requires that prison officials manifest actual knowledge of facts from which an inference could be drawn regarding the existence of a substantial risk. Farmer, 511 U.S. at 837. The Supreme Court has likewise emphasized that prison officials must actually draw the appropriate inference. Id. at 837-38 ("[A]n official's failure to alleviate a significant risk that he should have perceived but did not, while no cause for commendation, cannot  under our cases be condemned as the infliction of punishment.").
As a threshold observation, the record discloses nothing to suggest the corrections officers actually drew the inference of substantial risk to A.L. To be sure, the record certainly suggests some level of negligence. Taken as a whole, however, the fact that three officers allowed A.H.—and only A.H.—outside of his cell while the control panel remains unlocked does not satisfy the subjective inquiry's requirement of actual knowledge.
As Judge Carson's concurring opinion acknowledges, and as Judge Baldock argues in his partial dissent, the case against Sergeant Luna is strongest, on account of his firsthand experience with at least one prior incident of unauthorized access.5  But even if Sergeant Luna or the others were familiar with these incidents, I do not believe we can conclude they actually drew the inference of substantial risk to A.L. For one, all of these incidents transpired more than a year before the attack on A.L. Moreover, only two of them actually involved detainee-on-detainee violence.
From what best I can discern from the record, both incidents involved readily-distinguishable factual circumstances. In the first incident, one detainee lured the duty officer to a nearby closet on pretext of retrieving a mop so that a second detainee could access the control panel and unlock cells occupied by a third co-conspirator and their eventual victim. Notwithstanding a superficial resemblance, several significant differences undermine the connection between this incident and the assault on A.L. As a condition of "pre-disc," A.H. was the sole detainee permitted in the common area. And three corrections officers—as opposed to just one—observed his movements from their perch, just yards away from the commissary kiosk and the control panel.
The record discloses fewer specifics about the details of the second incident. But we know a single detainee somehow accessed the control panel to unlock another detainee's cell. And that he attacked the second detainee. The record does not disclose whether other detainees were present within the common area, or how many, if any, corrections officers might have been supervising the detainees. For these reasons, I would conclude the same logic that undermines the applicability of the previous incident to the assault on A.L. applies to this incident.
None of these distinctions should excuse the non-constitutional significance of these incidents. Whenever a detainee—particularly a juvenile—suffers violence at the hands of another detainee, it is important for the facility to identify and to address whatever underlying issues may have contributed to that harm. By the same token, we must acknowledge that not every wrong will sound in constitutional right and remedy. And—in part because these prior incidents present distinguishable factual circumstances—I cannot infer subjective  knowledge of the supposed substantial risk these circumstances posed to A.L.
To the extent, moreover, that we did infer subjective knowledge, Ms. Contreras has provided no evidence to suggest the corrections officers actually reached that inference. Even if I shared the conviction that reasonable corrections officers should have inferred A.H.'s plans from two previous incidents that transpired more than a year prior to these events, the Supreme Court has emphasized that the Eighth Amendment requires more than ordinary recklessness: "[W]e cannot accept petitioner's argument . . . that a prison official who was unaware of the substantial risk of harm to an inmate may nevertheless be held liable under the Eighth Amendment if the risk was obvious and a reasonable prison official would have noticed it." See Farmer, 511 U.S. at 841-42 (emphasis added). Said simply, we do not require corrections officers to read minds.
Although the corrections officers sought to protect A.L. from harm, it seems likely that negligence undermined their efforts. Negligence offers much cause for concern here; but precedent tells us it cannot elicit constitutional intervention. See, e.g., Berry v. City of Muskogee, 900 F.2d 1489, 1495-96 (10th Cir. 1990) (observing that deliberate indifference requires a greater degree of fault than negligence or gross negligence). To be clear, the facility likely could have addressed the risk of detainee-on-detainee violence more effectively. But we must abide by the Supreme Court's mandate to assess both objective risk and subjective awareness of that risk.
The subjective inquiry requires that we ask whether the officers knew of a substantial risk and consciously disregarded the dangers that risk posed to A.L. I cannot infer subjective knowledge of any substantial risk to A.L. from this record. And no evidence indicates the corrections officers manifested the requisite actual knowledge of this risk, in any event. I would accordingly conclude that Ms. Contreras has failed to carry her burden.
 B. Clearly Established Law
Even if we were to conclude a constitutional violation had occurred, the circumstances of this case nonetheless cannot satisfy the rigorous standards the Supreme Court has articulated for clearly established law. A "clearly established right is one that is sufficiently clear that every reasonable official would have understood that what he is doing violates that right." Mullenix v. Luna, 136 S. Ct. 305, 308, 193 L. Ed. 2d 255 (2015) (citations and quotation marks omitted).
We need not "require a case directly on point," but the Supreme Court has cautioned that "existing precedent must have placed the statutory or constitutional question beyond debate." Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted). This is because qualified immunity is meant to "protect[] all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law." Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted). The Supreme Court has repeatedly instructed lower courts "not to define clearly established law at a high level of generality." Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted).
As the Court has likewise emphasized "[t]he dispositive question is whether the violative nature of particular conduct is clearly established." Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted) (emphasis in original). Such an inquiry "must be undertaken in light of the specific context of the case, not as a broad general proposition." Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted) (emphasis added).
Ms. Contreras frames the constitutional violation at a high level of generality: "[A] known but disregarded threat to an inmate's physical safety, combined with evidence  of prior assaults and information about a specific threat can establish deliberate indifference." Aplt. Br. 21. As a threshold matter, I doubt this formulation can satisfy the rigorous standards for specificity required by the Supreme Court.6  See Mullenix, 136 S. Ct. at 308.
But even if—for the sake of argument—we take this rule as given, the two Tenth Circuit authorities cited most extensively by Ms. Contreras, Berry v. City of Muskogee, 900 F.2d 1489 (10th Cir. 1990), and Howard v. Waide, 534 F.3d 1227 (10th Cir. 2008), do not yield fair notice of a constitutional violation in this case.
In Berry, we held that a reasonable jury could conclude corrections officers had manifested deliberate indifference to the prospect of violence when one inmate was murdered by two others he had testified against at trial. 900 F.2d at 1498. Several observations readily distinguish this case from Berry. For one, the corrections officers in Berry took no action upon learning of the potential threat posed by the inmate's co-defendants. In this matter, by contrast, corrections officers placed all three aggressors onto "pre-disc" immediately upon their first and only threats to A.L.
Moreover, in Berry the perpetrators freely roamed the facility to access the murder weapon—a wire from a broom stored in a common area—under the nominal supervision of just one corrections officer. Id. at 1497. In this case—on account of the "pre-disc" precautions we have already discussed—A.H. was permitted outside of his cell only when other detainees were locked securely within theirs. And only then when not one, but three officers were present to oversee his activities. In our view, Berry cannot clearly establish a constitutional violation under the circumstances we now consider.
In Howard, we reversed the district court's decision granting summary judgment to corrections officers who failed to intervene when a newly-transferred inmate complained that members of the same prison gang who sexually abused him at a prior facility once again had begun to threaten him. 534 F.3d at 1241-42. The inmate was sexually assaulted three times before corrections officers acted on his request to be relocated to a facility that did not contain members of this gang. Id. at 1233-34.
In my view, the same central observation that distinguished this case from Berry applies with equal force to Howard. Here, corrections officers placed all three aggressors onto "pre-disc" lockdown as soon as they threatened A.L. Of course, Sergeant Luna, Officer Casado, and Cadet Platero should have been more attentive. Perhaps more suspicious, too. And certainly less distracted by the television. But we cannot ascribe constitutional significance to their negligence.
Both Berry and Howard clearly establish that credible threats merit reasonable response. These authorities do not, however, demand perfection under the challenging circumstances that corrections officers often confront; for the Supreme Court has observed that "not . . . every injury suffered by one prisoner at the hands of another [will] translate into constitutional liability." Farmer, 511 U.S. at 834 (cleaned up).
 The out-of-circuit authorities cited by Ms. Contreras fare little better. In Erickson v. Holloway, 77 F.3d 1078, 1080 (8th Cir. 1996), an inmate accessed an electronic control panel only after corrections officers left the room that housed the panel entirely unattended for six minutes. Given the Supreme Court's insistence that we contemplate "the specific context of [this] case," a world of difference separates the facts of Erickson from the situation we confront. See Mullenix 136 S. Ct. at 308. After all, Sergeant Luna, Officer Casado, and Cadet Platero never left the common room unattended for any period of time.
The same problem undermines Ms. Contreras' reliance upon Street v. Corrs. Corp. of Am., 102 F.3d 810 (6th Cir. 1996). In that case, a corrections officer—using an electronic control panel—opened every door in the unit after one inmate had threatened to assault another. See id. at 813-14. The inmate made good on this threat, and the Sixth Circuit reversed the district court's decision granting summary judgment to the corrections officer. Id. at 816. In this case, by contrast, Sergeant Luna, Officer Casado, and Cadet Platero imposed and enforced a regime of "pre-disc" lockdown against A.H. and his co-conspirators that sought to mitigate the risks all three aggressors might pose to A.L.
Nor does the final authority Ms. Contreras cites extensively, Junior v. Anderson, 724 F.3d 812 (7th Cir. 2013), clearly establish a constitutional violation under these circumstances. In that case, a corrections officer all but ignored the revelation that two cells that should have been secured remained unlocked. See id. at 813-14. After an inmate who should have been secured in one of these cells subsequently joined several others in attacking another prisoner, the Seventh Circuit reversed the district court's decision granting summary judgment to the corrections officer, who had also abandoned her post for at least fifteen minutes. See id. at 815.
In my view, the same differences that distinguish Erickson and Street from "the specific context of [this] case" also diminish the significance of Junior. See Mullenix 136 S. Ct. at 308. Although the record discloses that Officer Casado and Cadet Platero may have realized that the control panel remained unsecured, only one detainee—A.H., who was subject to "pre-disc" lockdown—was present in the common area. And all three corrections officers remained just steps away from their charge, as well as the electronic control panel.
It is, of course, true that some "constitutional violation[s] may be so obvious that similar conduct seldom arises in our cases," such that "it would be remarkable if the most obviously unconstitutional conduct should be the most immune from liability only because it is so flagrantly unlawful that few dare its attempt." Lowe v. Raemisch, 864 F.3d 1205, 1210-11 (10th Cir. 2017) (citations and quotation marks omitted). But we have construed this functional exception to the presumption against fair notice quite narrowly, as we must effectively conclude "our precedents render the legality of the conduct undebatable." See id. at 1211 (citing Aldaba v. Pickens, 844 F.3d 870, 877 (10th Cir. 2016)). This is not such a case.
In sum, no authorities clearly establish a constitutional violation under these circumstances.
 III. Conclusion
For the reasons previously articulated, I would affirm the district court's decision to grant summary judgment in this matter.
CARSON, J., Concurring in part and concurring in the judgment
Make no mistake. We expect corrections officers to protect those under their supervision— especially children. The officers here—more attuned to a television show than the juveniles in their charge—allowed violent inmates to brutally assault A.L. I find their failure to protect A.L. inexcusable. But 42 U.S.C. § 1983 provides no remedy to Plaintiff for unprofessional or negligent conduct. Instead, Plaintiff may only recover against the officers if they violated a clearly established constitutional right. We begin, therefore, by determining whether Plaintiff has met her burden.
Plaintiff credibly argues that the officers' conduct violated A.L's constitutional rights. She presents a strong case against the supervisor—Officer Luna. After all, he knew that inmates previously accessed the control panel to commit violence against one another. But the other officers did not share Luna's prior knowledge. So the case against them is not so clear.
Even so, I would not reach the constitutional question because, even if the officers violated A.L's constitutional rights, those rights were not clearly established. When our body of caselaw contains no case with remarkably similar facts, we look to a "sliding scale" analysis to determine whether clearly established law prohibited an officer's conduct. Casey v. City of Fed. Heights, 509 F.3d 1278, 1284 (10th Cir. 2007). Under the sliding scale, the worse the conduct given prevailing constitutional principles, the less specificity is required from prior caselaw to clearly establish the violation. Id.
Some recent decisions suggest the sliding scale approach may conflict with current Supreme Court authority, but no case has overruled it. See Lowe v. Raemisch, 864 F.3d 1205, 1211 n.10 (10th Cir. 2017) (noting our sliding scale approach may allow us to find a clearly established right even when a precedent is neither on point nor obviously applicable); Aldaba v. Pickens, 844 F.3d 870, 874 n.1 (10th Cir. 2016). With no case overruling it, the sliding-scale approach lives in this Circuit. But that said, we must apply it cautiously as contemporary Supreme Court cases require an ever-increasing level of factual similarity for prior decisions to place a statutory or constitutional question beyond debate.1  Mullenix v. Luna, 136 S. Ct. 305, 308, 193 L. Ed. 2d 255 (2015) (emphasizing that Court has repeatedly told lower courts not to define clearly established law at a high level of generality).
I view this case as exceedingly close on both prongs of the qualified immunity analysis. Ultimately, however, I conclude the precedents from this Circuit and the Supreme Court do not place the constitutional question beyond debate (even considering the sliding scale approach). Plaintiff's claims must therefore fail against the individual officers. So I join Chief Judge Tymkovich's opinion as far as it addresses the "clearly established" prong of the qualified immunity analysis. Because I would not reach the constitutional question, I join neither Judge Baldock's nor Judge Tymkovich's well-presented analysis of that issue.
That leaves Plaintiff's Monell claim against the Board. The district court determined that Plaintiff's claim against the Board failed as a matter of law because she did not satisfy the third element for municipal liability—deliberate indifference.  The district court determined that the Board could not be deliberately indifferent to a constitutional right unless the right is clearly established. See, e.g., Arrington-Bey v. City of Bedford Heights, 858 F.3d 988, 994 (6th Cir. 2017). And because the district court found the right was not clearly established, it ruled the Board could not have been deliberately indifferent to A.L.'s rights. I agree.
Whether a municipal policymaker can be liable for deliberate indifference to a constitutional right that has not yet been established is an interesting one. And the answer depends on the type of claim alleged against the municipality. Consider first a claim based directly on a municipal act such as the termination of a municipal employee without due process. In that case, "the violated right need not be clearly established because fault and causation obviously belong to the city." Arrington-Bey, 858 F.3d at 994-95.
But then consider a claim based on a municipality's failure to properly train its employees. There, the theory stems from the municipality's failure to teach its employees not to violate a person's constitutional rights. In that posture, the "municipality's alleged responsibility for a constitutional violation stems from an employee's unconstitutional act [and the municipality's] failure to prevent the harm must be shown to be deliberate under 'rigorous requirements of culpability and causation.'" Id. at 995 (quoting Bd. of Cty. Comm'rs of Bryan Cty. v. Brown, 520 U.S. 397, 415, 117 S. Ct. 1382, 137 L. Ed. 2d 626 (1997)). Thus, the violated right in a failure to train case "must be clearly established because a municipality cannot deliberately shirk a constitutional duty unless that duty is clear. Id. The Second, Sixth, and Eighth Circuits have each reached this conclusion. Townes v. City of New York, 176 F.3d 138, 143-44 (2d Cir. 1999); Arrington-Bey, 858 F. 3d at 995; Szabla v. City of Brooklyn Park, 486 F.3d 385, 393 (8th Cir. 2007) (en banc).
Judge Baldock believes that in application this means the district court inappropriately granted the Board qualified immunity. I agree that municipalities cannot invoke the doctrine of qualified immunity. Owen v. City of Independence, 445 U.S. 622, 624-25, 100 S. Ct. 1398, 63 L. Ed. 2d 673 (1980) (holding that municipalities cannot assert the doctrine of qualified immunity). But this case differs remarkably from Owen. Owen arose from a claim of deliberate municipal indifference where the municipality directly caused the constitutional injury. Id. at 633. Here, by contrast, Plaintiff advances a failure to train theory in which she "must show not only that an employee's act caused a constitutional tort, but also that the city's failure to train its employees caused the employee's violation and that the city culpably declined to train its 'employees to handle recurring situations presenting an obvious potential for such a violation.'" Arrington-Bey, 858 F.3d at 995 (citing Brown, 520 U.S. at 409). The Supreme Court's statement "obvious potential for such a violation" requires that the constitutional violation be obvious (i.e., clearly established). Requiring that the right be clearly established in this context does not give qualified immunity to municipalities; it simply follows the Supreme Court's demand "that deliberate indifference in fact be deliberate." Arrington-Bey, 858 F.3d at 995 (citing Szabla, 486 F.3d at 394).
Plaintiff alleged the County engaged in deliberate indifference by failing to adequately train its correction officers. For the reasons discussed above, however, Plaintiff's claim must fail because she cannot show the right the Board violated was obvious. I would therefore affirm the district  court's order granting summary judgment to the Board on the Monell claim. I thus concur in the judgment on the Monell claim, although on a different ground than Chief Judge Tymkovich who concluded no constitutional violation occurred.
For these reasons, I respectfully concur in part and concur in the judgment.
