 in part.
I disagree with the majority opinion's conclusion that a reasonably objective police officer would believe that probable cause existed to make a warrantless arrest of Mr. Hinkle. Even if probable cause arguably existed at some point during the investigation, I would conclude it dissipated upon Deputy Estep's pre-arrest exchanges with Mr. Hinkle and Mr. Keown, which established the latter owned the suspect trailer.
The majority opinion sets forth the series of compounding errors that gave rise to the arrest. Had Deputy Estep arrested Mr. Hinkle immediately upon their first  face-to-face contact, it would have been a closer call. But Deputy Estep continued his investigation after having Mr. Hinkle detained at a traffic stop. At that point, he began an interview with Mr. Hinkle and, eventually, Mr. Keown. During these conversations, new information came to light—information that, in my view, dissipated the factual basis for Mr. Hinkle's warrantless arrest and demanded additional investigation.
We have observed that "probable cause becomes stale when new information received by the police nullifies information critical to the earlier probable cause determination." United States v. Dalton, 918 F.3d 1117, 1128 (10th Cir. 2019) (citing Wayne Lafave, Search and Seizure § 4.7(a) at 822 (5th ed. 2012)); see also Bigford v. Taylor, 834 F.2d 1213, 1218 (5th Cir. 1988) (police "may not disregard facts tending to dissipate probable cause" in making arrests). I conclude the discussions between Deputy Estep, Mr. Hinkle, and Mr. Keown dissipated probable cause for Mr. Hinkle's arrest and compelled Deputy Estep to undertake further investigation.
During the course of their conversation, Mr. Hinkle informed Deputy Estep that—when they had earlier spoken via phone—he misunderstood which trailer Deputy Estep was referencing, and that he did not own the suspect trailer.1  As he explained, Mr. Hinkle owned a different trailer that was parked elsewhere, and Mr. Keown owned the suspect trailer. Indeed, Mr. Hinkle repeatedly denied ownership of that trailer and affirmed that Mr. Keown had purchased it from the Carpenters Church in South Carolina. Deputy Estep, moreover, called Mr. Keown, who corroborated Mr. Hinkle's account and insisted the latter "had nothing to do with [the trailer]." Appellant's Appx. vol. 4 at 932.2  At that point, even Deputy Estep acknowledged that an in-person interview with Mr. Keown was appropriate and the matter was "still under investigation." Id. at 934. Yet an arrest ensued, leading to incarceration and a strip search in the local jail.
At the very least, I would conclude these developments undermined a reasonable belief that probable cause existed, and created an obligation to investigate Mr. Hinkle's involvement more thoroughly before placing him under arrest. An objectively reasonable officer would have interviewed Mr. Keown or sought information regarding title and registration.3  That Mr. Keown failed to meet Mr. Hinkle and Deputy Estep that night to resolve this misunderstanding does not undermine my conclusion. When coupled with his repeated assurances to the contrary, this failure to appear may well have given rise to renewed suspicions regarding Mr. Keown. But this behavior sheds no new light on the involvement—or lack thereof—of Mr. Hinkle, whose facially plausible explanation of the misunderstanding was corroborated by someone who stood to gain nothing by volunteering his ownership of the trailer.
 I accordingly part ways with the majority opinion and conclude that Deputy Estep violated Mr. Hinkle's Fourth Amendment rights in deciding to arrest him subsequent to this exchange.
I also disagree with the majority's reversal of the strip search claim. For the reasons set forth by the district court I would affirm. The record shows that Mr. Hinkle would be placed in close proximity with other detainees and jail employees during the intake process, justifying a search for weapons or contraband.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.

 

