) ("If SUWA seeks identical relief to the United States—that is, federal retention of the maximum amount of property—then the United States provides adequate representation of SUWA's interests . . . . If SUWA seeks relief different from the  United States—because the government does not, in fact, wish to retain maximum property—then SUWA must demonstrate that it possess standing according to Town of Chester.").
Were this a case regarding the administration of the land at issue, as opposed to merely its ownership, the majority could potentially thread the needle in the manner it seeks to here. See Kane III, 928 F.3d at 898 n.1 (Tymkovich, J., dissenting). For example, in administrative cases like the ones cited by the majority, the United States usually must consider a wide array of interests and engage in extensive balancing. See, e.g., Doe v. Zucker, No. 117-CV-1005, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1345, 2019 WL 111020 (N.D.N.Y. Jan. 4, 2019). This could lead to the type of symmetry in relief sought, yet asymmetry in ultimate resolution objectives, that could justify intervention along the lines the majority proposes. But in the context of a property dispute like the present one, such fine distinctions break down.
 B. SUWA's Standing
Perhaps realizing SUWA must demonstrate standing to intervene, the majority holds that SUWA established standing. See Kane III, 928 F.3d at 888. That conclusion is in error. SUWA's alleged injury is too attenuated and speculative to provide standing under Article III to participate in this suit regarding the relative property rights of the United States and the Utah entities.
To establish Article III standing, an intervenor must first show "'an injury in fact'—an invasion of a legally protected interest which is (a) concrete and particularized, and (b) 'actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical.'" Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992) (citations omitted). Second, there must be a "causal connection between the injury and the conduct complained of—the injury has to be 'fairly traceable to the challenged action of the defendant.'" Id. Third, "it must be 'likely,' as opposed to merely 'speculative,' that the injury will be 'redressed by a favorable decision.'" Id. at 561.
SUWA's argument, adopted by the majority, stands on a series of conjectures regarding hypothetical future land use. To conclude SUWA has standing, one must assume: "(1) the United States will not zealously defend its title to the relevant roads, (2) the title adjudication will thus lead to an appreciably different outcome regarding pre-1976 uses, (3) this appreciable difference will lead Kane County to open the relevant roads to greater vehicular traffic than it would have otherwise, and finally, (4) the greater vehicular traffic will, at the margin, cause aesthetic environmental injury to SUWA members who may return to the particular areas in the future." Kane III, 928 F.3d at 899-900 (Tymkovich, J., dissenting). This attenuation proves too much.
As the Court found in Clapper v. Amnesty International USA, such a theory of "future injury is too speculative to satisfy the well-established requirement that threatened injury must be 'certainly impending.'" 568 U.S. 398, 401, 133 S. Ct. 1138, 185 L. Ed. 2d 264 (2013). In Clapper, the Court declined to find that human rights, labor, legal, and media organizations had standing to challenge the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act as unconstitutional because the Court found allegations that the organizations would be subject to the surveillance authorized by the Act too speculative. The Court noted its reluctance "to endorse standing theories that require guesswork as to how independent decisionmakers will exercise their judgment." Id. at 413. The Court's hesitancy is well-founded and should be applied here to  preclude SUWA from joining this case where its only supposed injury relies on a highly attenuated chain of possibilities. See Summers v. Earth Island Inst., 555 U.S. 488, 496, 129 S. Ct. 1142, 173 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2009) (rejecting environmental organizations' standing claims where they were similarly premised on a series of speculation).
The nature of the suit further compels this result. As a quiet title action, this dispute focuses solely on the various ownership rights the parties have in the disputed rights-of-way. SUWA has no role as a party in such litigation because it lacks any independent ownership claim in the disputed property.3  This case does not create any new property rights, does not concern the administration of the land at issue, and will not directly result in any physical changes to the subject property. Instead, it concerns solely what property rights exist in light of pre-1976 uses of the roads at issue. See Kane II, 772 F.3d at 1223-24.
Moreover, any future improvements that Kane County might make that could significantly affect the surrounding lands will require additional consultation with the federal government. See S. Utah Wilderness All. v. BLM, 425 F.3d 735, 748-49 (10th Cir. 2005) ("[E]ven legitimate changes in the character of the roadway require consultation when those changes go beyond routine maintenance."). In short, although SUWA may have valid considerations it wishes to present to whichever party owns the property at issue regarding how to manage that land, this is not the forum to present these arguments. The present suit merely concerns which regulator will be the recipient of such advocacy in the future as the owner of, and therefore the party responsible for administering, the land.
 II. Intervention and the Adequacy of the United States' Representation
Finally, the majority erred in holding that the United States may not adequately represent SUWA's interests.4  Kane III, 928 F.3d at 892. "Even if an applicant satisfies the other requirements of [Federal Rule of Civil Procedure] 24(a)(2), it is not entitled to intervene if its interest is adequately represented by existing parties." San Juan Cty., 503 F.3d at 1203. Where the applicant for intervention has the same objective as one of the parties, a "general presumption" exists that representation is adequate. Id. at 1204. Notably, the majority concluded the United States  may not adequately represent SUWA's interests despite two prior statements from this court to the contrary. See San Juan Cty., 503 F.3d at 1204-06; Kane I, 597 F.3d at 1134.
In San Juan County, the judgment of this court denying SUWA the right to intervene rested, at least in part, on the fact that the United States adequately represented SUWA's interest. See 503 F.3d at 1204. In Kane I, this court similarly held that SUWA had no right to intervene in this case because the United States adequately represented SUWA's interest. See 597 F.3d at 1135. Rather than adhering to these precedents, the majority departs, expressly adopting the reasoning of an opinion that gained only four judges' allegiance in San Juan County.5  See Kane III, 928 F.3d at 893-94 (citing San Juan Cty., 503 F.3d at 1226 (Ebel, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part)).
The majority rests this departure on two prongs. First, it attempts to bifurcate the issues of title and scope and to cast our prior precedent as relating only to title. See Kane III, 928 F.3d at 894 ("[T]hough SUWA and the United States had identical interests in the title determination, they do not on scope."). This provides no basis for departing from San Juan County and Kane I. Contrary to the majority's characterization of San Juan County as relating exclusively to title, the district court characterized the issues presented in that case as relating to "the existence or non-existence of a right-of-way and its length and its breadth." San Juan Cty., 503 F.3d at 1206 (emphasis added) (quoting the district court). Moreover, the majority's suggestion that the question of scope was not before the court until now is belied by the fact that, following our denial of SUWA's attempt to intervene in Kane I, the district court held a trial and determined the scope of the rights-of-way in question. As the majority concedes, "scope is inherent in the quiet title process," Kane III, 928 F.3d at 894, and as such has always been at issue in this case.
Second, the majority seeks to justify its departure from our precedent by referring to the change in presidential administration. Although such a change may, in certain circumstances, warrant intervention, this is not one of them. Simply put, a change in presidential administration does not affect the adjudication of property ownership. See Kane III, 928 F.3d at 905 (Tymkovich, J., dissenting). Unlike APA challenges concerning land use like those raised by the majority, a dispute over land ownership does not call upon the government to consider the wide array of interests the majority suggests are brought to bear and which subsequent administrations might weigh differently from prior ones. To the contrary, scope hinges exclusively on the pre-1976 usage of the roads in question. See Kane II, 772 F.3d at 1223 ("The scope of an R.S. 2477 right of way is limited by the established usage of the route as of the date of the repeal of the statute."). Any adjustments to scope from the pre-1976 uses must rest on what is "reasonable and necessary . . . in the light of traditional uses to which the right-of-way was put." Id. at 1223. Present day interests that the United States might consider regarding the land's use are not relevant to the scope of the rights-of-way in  question. Accordingly, even following the change in administration, there is no daylight between the United States' interests and those of SUWA, and the majority's conclusion that the United States will not adequately represent those interests is unfounded.6 
The APA cases the majority cites fail to disturb this conclusion. In WildEarth Guardians v. United States Forest Service, this court approved intervention where the underlying issue concerned regulatory compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act in approving methane venting from a coal mine. See 573 F.3d 992, 994 (10th Cir. 2009). In Utah Ass'n of Counties v. Clinton, this court approved intervention where the underlying issue concerned compliance with NEPA and the Federal Land Policy and Management Act in the creation of the Grand Staircase Escalante National Monument. See 255 F.3d 1246, 1248-49, 1256 (10th Cir. 2001). In both, the government conduct at issue necessarily implicated a "broad spectrum" of interests. WildEarth Guardians, 573 F.3d at 996; Utah Ass'n of Counties, 255 F.3d at 1255-56. Neither case warrants the same result here for the simple reason that the government's defense of its title in a quiet title action does not implicate a similarly broad array of interests. Unlike government decisions concerning how to use and regulate land, defending title only implicates the government's interest in maintaining land ownership. Indeed, as the majority concedes, the United States seeks "'retention of the maximum amount of property' and will argue for 'the smallest widths it can based on the historical evidence.'" Kane III, 928 F.3d at 888. This aligns the government's interests with SUWA's and suffices to show adequate representation.
As additional justifications, the majority points to the fact that "the United States opposes SUWA's intervention motion," arguing this demonstrates "[the United States] may not adequately represent SUWA's interests." Kane III, 928 F.3d at 895. This was squarely addressed and dismissed in San Juan County. 503 F.3d at 1206 ("[W]e are not inclined to infer from the Federal Defendants' opposition to intervention that they will fail to vigorously resist the claim to an R.S. 2477 right-of-way."). The majority also cites commentary from the United States implying that it might contemplate settlement in an effort to resolve the "12,000 of these claims . . . as quickly and efficiently as it can." Kane III, 928 F.3d at 895. But as the majority concedes, the prospect of settlement cannot support a finding that the United States may not adequately represent the interests involved. Id. at 892 ("Nor is representation inadequate merely because the representative enters into a settlement, because any case, even the most vigorously defended, may culminate in a settlement.").
Accordingly, SUWA has failed to show any change in circumstances warranting a reversal of our previous conclusion that the United States adequately represents SUWA's interests in this quiet title action.
Because the panel majority's opinion is inconsistent with Supreme Court precedent regarding Article III standing and  our precedent on the right to intervention, I would have granted the petitions for rehearing en banc.

 

