 in part and dissenting in part). Courts have thus long recognized that the "line between procedural and substantive law is hazy." Erie R. Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, 92, 58 S. Ct. 817, 82 L. Ed. 1188 (1938) (Reed, J., concurring). It is often difficult to completely differentiate procedure and substance because procedure often affects substance—that is, the procedural process through which a court makes a substantive determination influences the reasonableness of the substantive determination itself. See United States v. Barnes, 890 F.3d 910, 916-17 (10th Cir. 2018) (explaining how, in the sentencing context, the "distinction between procedural and substantive reasonableness is . . . not necessarily sharp" since the procedures a court employs to sentence a defendant influences the reasonableness of the substantive sentence).
We consequently have little trouble concluding the procedures a state court employs to make factual determinations—here, deciding whether to order an evidentiary hearing—can affect the reasonableness of the court's subsequent factual determinations. And sometimes, declining to hold an evidentiary hearing may so affect, and indeed infect, a state court's fact-finding process that it renders the court's factual determinations unreasonable. See Hurles, 752 F.3d at 790-91. But  this will be a rare occurrence because § 2254(d)(2)'s stringent standard still applies. Thus, a state court's decision not to hold an evidentiary hearing only renders its factual findings unreasonable in this context if all "[r]easonable minds" agree that the state court needed to hold a hearing in order to make those factual determinations. See Brumfield, 135 S. Ct. at 2277; see also Taylor, 366 F.3d at 999-1000. In other words, failing to hold such a hearing only overcomes AEDPA's bar on relief if "any appellate court to whom the defect [was] pointed out would be unreasonable in holding that the state court's fact-finding process was adequate." Taylor, 366 F.3d at 1000.
This decision, then, does not require state courts to hold evidentiary hearings in all, or even most, cases. Nor does it suggest petitioners can easily escape AEDPA's deferential standard because the state court denied their request for an evidentiary hearing. To the contrary, most of the time (including in this case) it will be reasonable for a state court to make factual determinations based on the evidence before it without holding a hearing. Often, after all, a hearing would only repeat the same evidence already presented to the court in either the record below or the application for an evidentiary hearing. And when assessing the objective reasonableness of a state court decision, our review must be "particularly deferential to our state-court colleagues," id., mindful of the fact that our review under AEDPA serves only as "a guard against extreme malfunctions in the state criminal justice systems," Richter, 562 U.S. at 102-03.
Applying this standard here, we conclude § 2254(d)(2) forbids us from disturbing the OCCA's decision. This is not one of those rare cases in which all reasonable courts would have concluded it was necessary to hold an evidentiary hearing in order to conclude the trial judge's statement no juror continuously slept adequately refuted the contrary assertions in the affidavits Smith produced. Rather, it was reasonable for the state court to find the judge's statement more persuasive than the affidavits. The reason for this is, at bottom, simple: the evidence did not equally support the judge's statement and the allegations in Smith's affidavits. Instead, additional factors corroborated the judge's direct observation that no juror slept continuously throughout trial.
To start with, the fact that no lawyer on either side made any mention of sleeping jurors strongly supports the OCCA's decision to credit the trial judge's statement. After all, if a juror had, in fact, been continuously sleeping for eight days, it seems implausible the lawyers on both sides would have failed to notice, and alert the court of, such egregious juror misconduct. This is especially so since five lawyers were in the courtroom—three for Oklahoma and two for the defense.2  And each of these attorneys, of course, had a vested interest in the case and would have been closely watching the jury to see how it reacted to the evidence. Thus, the silence of all five lawyers about a sleeping juror buttresses the judge's belief no juror continuously slept throughout the trial.
We realize Smith contends her counsel performed ineffectively for failing to so object. But this does not explain the lack of objection from Oklahoma's lawyers. They, too, had an interest in whether the jury was paying attention to the case, yet they also failed to ever alert the court that a juror was continuously asleep.3 
 It is true the trial judge twice referenced sleeping jurors. On the second day of trial, before the judge released the jurors for lunch, he reminded them to remain vigilant and "be sure [their] eyes [were] open at all times."4  Vol. II Trial Tr. at 368. Similarly, on the fourth day of trial, before releasing the jurors for the day, the judge asked them to "redouble [their] efforts to remain alert and attentive" and remember "what [he] said the other day about the lower eyelid catching the upper eyelid." Id. at 1008. And indeed, the judge acknowledged that, on one occasion, he saw a juror sleeping and quickly admonished the juror for doing so.
But these references to a sleeping juror, in fact, add credibility to the judge's assertion no juror continuously slept during the eight-day trial. The judge only could have noticed a juror sleeping, after all, if he was attentively watching the jury. And the judge's admonishment to one juror highlights how he was concerned about juror misconduct and therefore monitored the jury's behavior. And perhaps even more importantly, the admonishment evidences the judge's willingness to take steps to correct any misbehavior he witnessed.
We therefore have a case in which the parties presented competing contentions to the OCCA, but the evidence before the OCCA did not equally support both sides of the story. For the reasons we just explained, the OCCA could well have concluded that more evidence supported the trial judge's assertion no juror continuously slept than the contentions to the contrary in the competing affidavits. Thus, a reasonable court could have concluded it did not need to hold an evidentiary hearing in order to credit the trial judge's conclusion no juror constantly slept over the affidavits Smith marshaled. See Frost, 749 F.3d at 1225. The OCCA's denial of Smith's request for a hearing, then, did not render its subsequent factual determinations unreasonable under § 2254(d)(2).
Our conclusion accords with a recent decision by the Eleventh Circuit. In that case, like here, the petitioner claimed flaws in the state court's fact-finding process stripped its factual finding of deference under AEDPA. Landers, 776 F.3d at 1297. More precisely, he alleged it was objectively unreasonable for the state court to "resolve[] a credibility dispute on the basis of dueling affidavits, without an evidentiary hearing." Id. The Eleventh Circuit disagreed. Id. at 1297-98. The "state court had plausible reasons," it emphasized, to credit one set of affidavits over another—namely, that the "the dueling affidavits" bore "strikingly different indicia of reliability." Id. at 1297. Accordingly, Landers held that it was objectively reasonable for the state court to credit the more strongly supported set of affidavits over the other without holding an evidentiary hearing. In this case, like Landers, the OCCA "had plausible reasons" to credit the judge's statement. Id. The OCCA accordingly acted reasonably by crediting  a stronger set of allegations over a shakier set without an evidentiary hearing.
Smith highlights how the five juror affidavits were not before the trial judge when he concluded no juror continuously slept; at that point, Smith had only produced two affidavits from trial attendees. She thus suggests the OCCA erred by crediting the judge's account, which was based on incomplete information. It is true the trial judge did not see the juror affidavits before asserting no juror continuously slept. But the judge saw something much more important—the trial itself. We therefore fail to understand how the judge's statement, which was based on his personal observation of the trial, could have been based on incomplete information.
To conclude, we emphasize the limited nature of our review. No doubt, the affidavits Smith cites contain serious charges. And the fact that each juror affidavit describes the same event in different, detailed terms lends credibility to their accounts. So perhaps, if presented with this question in the first instance, we would have ordered an evidentiary hearing on the issue. But AEDPA demands more. It allows us to disturb the OCCA's decision only if no reasonable court could have credited the trial judge's statement without holding a hearing. And because other evidence created strong inferences in favor of the judge's conclusion no juror constantly slept, we conclude the OCCA acted in an objectively reasonable way by endorsing his account.
In sum, the OCCA's decision not to hold an evidentiary hearing does not render its factual findings unreasonable under § 2254(d)(2).
 b. The OCCA's Credibility Determination
Smith also claims the OCCA's credibility determination itself—crediting the judge's statement over the jurors' affidavits—qualifies as an objectively unreasonable factual determination under § 2254(d)(2). We reject this contention for the reasons described above. Additional evidence, namely the lack of any objections by counsel to the allegedly sleeping juror, supports the OCCA's finding. We therefore cannot say crediting the judge's account qualifies as an objectively unreasonable determination of facts under § 2254(d)(2). AEDPA accordingly restricts us from granting relief.
 2. Request to Remand to the District Court for an Evidentiary Hearing
Smith also asks us to remand this case to the district court to conduct an evidentiary hearing. Her argument focuses on § 2254(e)(2). Although that subsection bars federal courts from holding evidentiary hearings if the petitioner "failed to develop the basis of the claim in State court," 28 U.S.C. § 2254(e)(2),5  it does not bar us  from holding a hearing in this case, Smith says, because she did try to develop the basis of her claim before the OCCA by requesting an evidentiary hearing. In support, she cites Miller v. Champion, 161 F.3d 1249 (10th Cir. 1998). There, we held a habeas petitioner "diligently sought to develop the factual basis underlying his" petition when he asked for, but was denied, an evidentiary hearing in state court. Id. at 1253. Miller accordingly concluded that "AEDPA d[id] not preclude" the petitioner "from receiving an evidentiary hearing." Id. Smith thus claims Miller stands for the proposition that where, as here, the state court denied petitioner's request for an evidentiary hearing, § 2254 does not preclude a federal district court from holding a hearing. In short, Smith argues that because § 2254(e)(2) does not bar us from ordering an evidentiary hearing, we can, in fact, order such a hearing.
We agree that § 2254(e)(2) does not prevent us from ordering an evidentiary hearing. But that is only half the story. When we review habeas petitions under § 2254, "the deferential standards prescribed by [§ 2254(d)] control whether to grant habeas relief." Schriro v. Landrigan, 550 U.S. 465, 474, 127 S. Ct. 1933, 167 L. Ed. 2d 836 (2007). And when determining whether petitioners have satisfied § 2254(d)'s deferential standard, our review is "limited to the record that was before the state court that adjudicated the claim on the merits." Cullen v. Pinholster, 563 U.S. 170, 131 S. Ct. 1388, 179 L. Ed. 2d 557 (2011).6  It follows that when we review petitions under § 2254, we can only order evidentiary hearings if the petitioner meets the requirements in both §§ 2254(d) and (e)(2). This rule makes good sense. After all, so long as § 2254(d)'s disallowance of relief continues to apply, federal courts cannot consider any evidence developed at an evidentiary hearing.
To the extent Miller contradicts this rule, its reasoning has been abrogated by Schriro and Cullen. Indeed, our circuit has already recognized this—albeit, not directly. See Black v. Workman, 682 F.3d 880, 895-96, 485 Fed. Appx. 917 (10th Cir. 2012) (explaining that Mayes v. Gibson, 210 F.3d 1284, 1287-88 (10th Cir. 2000), which followed Miller's reasoning, was "questionable in light of" Cullen). Smith's reliance on Miller is similarly misplaced.
In sum, because AEDPA bars us from granting relief for the reasons we explained above, it also bars us from ordering an evidentiary hearing.
 B. Trial Publicity
Smith also claims pervasive and prejudicial media coverage of the trial exposed jurors to outside information in violation of her rights to an impartial jury and due process guaranteed by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments.7 
A "jury's verdict 'must be based upon the evidence developed at trial,'  not on extraneous information presented outside 'a public courtroom where there is full judicial protection of the defendant's right of confrontation, of cross-examination, and of counsel.'" Matthews v. Workman, 577 F.3d 1175, 1181 (10th Cir. 2009) (quoting Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 722, 81 S. Ct. 1639, 6 L. Ed. 2d 751 (1961), then Turner v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 466, 473, 85 S. Ct. 546, 13 L. Ed. 2d 424 (1965)). But habeas petitioners are not categorically entitled to relief when jurors are exposed to extraneous information. Petitioners must also prove prejudice. That is, the petitioner must establish that the jury's improper exposure to outside evidence had a "'substantial and injurious effect on the verdict"—in other words, that the error was not harmless. See id. (quoting Fry v. Pliler, 551 U.S. 112, 127, 127 S. Ct. 2321, 168 L. Ed. 2d 16 (2007)).
The OCCA denied relief because, in its view, Smith could not show the alleged misconduct prejudiced her. The parties agree this qualifies as an adjudication on the merits. See Aplt. Br. at 31. Accordingly, § 2254(d) "control[s] whether to grant habeas relief." Schriro, 550 U.S. at 474. More precisely, we can only review this juror-exposure claim under de novo review if we first determine that § 2254(d)'s limitation on relief is lifted. Absent such a showing, we must deny the petition.
Despite this, Smith fails to argue the OCCA's denial of this claim satisfies the standard in either §§ 2254(d)(1) or (2). Indeed, although Smith's opening brief spends fifteen pages discussing this issue, see Aplt. Br. at 24-39, the brief makes no mention of AEDPA's controlling standard. Instead, the brief argues Smith is entitled to relief under de novo review. To be sure, the brief cites numerous Supreme Court cases it claims demonstrate the merits of Smith's claim. But it never explains whether or why the OCCA's opinion was contrary to, or an unreasonable application of, these cases. Moreover, the absence of any reference to AEDPA's deferential standard is especially glaring since the magistrate judge's opinion, which the district court adopted, thoroughly considered that issue and concluded § 2254(d) forbade it from granting relief. Indeed, in a section entitled "Section 2254(d) Analysis" the lower-court opinion laid out the numerous reasons why § 2254(d) precluded relief.
And in fact, Smith's reply brief asserts that we can "address the merits of [her] claims de novo only if the OCCA's decision was 'based on an unreasonable determination of the facts.'" Reply Br. at 1 (emphases added) (quoting § 2254(d)(2)). In other words, we read the reply brief to expressly concede that Smith's only argument that § 2254(d) does not bar relief on all of her claims is based on subsection (d)(2), not (d)(1). And the only argument about § 2254(d)(2) she made dealt with juror misconduct related to the allegedly sleeping juror, which we discussed and rejected above.
Smith's opening brief, then, failed to argue the OCCA's rejection of this claim overcomes § 2254(d)'s bar on relief. It also failed to challenge the district court's conclusion to the contrary. This was a critical omission since § 2254(d) determines whether we can grant relief. Smith's silence on this threshold requirement thus renders the issue inadequately briefed, so we need not consider it. See, e.g., Redmond v. Crowther, 882 F.3d 927, 940-41 (10th Cir. 2018); Eateries, Inc. v. J. R. Simplot Co., 346 F.3d 1225, 1232 (10th Cir. 2003) (explaining how we will not "manufacture a party's argument for it"); see also Phillips v. Calhoun, 956 F.2d 949, 954 (10th Cir. 1992) (stating we will not question the reasoning of a district court unless a petitioner "actually argues" against it).
 Even if Smith had not forfeited this claim, § 2254(d) would compel denying relief for the reasons the magistrate judge ably explained. For one thing, the key cases Smith cites are readily distinguishable. For example, Smith relies heavily on Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U.S. 333, 86 S. Ct. 1507, 16 L. Ed. 2d 600 (1966). But in that case, the trial court made no effort to "control the release of leads, information, and gossip to the press by police officers, witnesses, and the counsel for both sides." Id. at 359. Here, in stark contrast, the trial court issued a gag order directing attorneys, law enforcement personnel, and witnesses not to discuss the criminal proceeding publically.
Indeed, the record reveals the trial court took significant steps to ensure the jurors were not exposed to extraneous outside information—despite the heightened public interest in the trial. The court granted the defense's request to transfer venue for this very reason. During the voir dire of potential jurors, moreover, both sides "were permitted to question the jury pool extensively," and these questions included "whether any potential juror had knowledge of the" case and "what effect the media's courthouse presence had upon each of them." App. at 339-40. Only three jurors had previously heard of the case. And throughout the course of the trial, the judge repeatedly reminded the jury not to look at any extraneous information.
Thus, although we agree that the media widely publicized Smith's indictment, trial, and ultimate conviction, the record persuades us that the trial court went to great lengths to ensure the jurors were not overly exposed to this publicity. And even if some jurors did, in fact, access some extraneous information, Smith falls far short of showing it was unreasonable for the OCCA to conclude the exposure did not prejudice her.8 
 IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, we AFFIRM the district court's denial of Smith's § 2254 petition.
Concur by: TYMKOVICH  
Concur




TYMKOVICH, Chief Judge, concurring.
The panel decision recognizes that under § 2254(d)(2) we may not grant relief unless a state court's determination "was based on an unreasonable determination of facts." 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(2). I write separately because I would flesh out this language in accordance with Supreme Court precedent. I would clarify that we may not grant a writ unless "all fairminded jurists would agree" that the state court's factual determination was incorrect. See Frost v. Pryor, 749 F.3d 1212, 1225 (10th Cir. 2014); Harrington v. Richter, 562 U.S. 86, 101, 131 S. Ct. 770, 178 L. Ed. 2d 624 (2011).
I realize neither this circuit nor the Supreme Court has explicitly used the phrase "fairminded jurist" when defining what qualifies as an unreasonable factual determination under § 2254(d)(2). Rather, both rely on the phrase to define what constitutes an unreasonable application of federal law under § 2254(d)(1). See Richter, 562 U.S. at 101; Frost, 749 F.3d at 1225.
 In my view, however, the "fairminded jurist" language from Richter illuminates the meaning of "unreasonable" in both §§ 2254(d)(1) and (d)(2). That is, just as a state court's application of federal law qualifies as "unreasonable" under § 2254(d)(1) only if no fairminded jurists could conclude the application correctly applied with federal law, Richter, 562 U.S. at 101, a state court's factual determination likewise qualifies as "unreasonable" under § 2254(d)(2) only if no fairminded jurist could conclude the determination was, in fact, correct.
Supreme Court precedent supports this rule. Brumfield v. Cain explained that a state court's factual determination is not unreasonable simply because "reasonable minds reviewing the record might disagree about the [factual] finding in question." 135 S. Ct. 2269, 2277, 192 L. Ed. 2d 356 (2015). If reasonable minds differing about the correctness of a factual finding does not render a factual determination unreasonable, it follows that what does render a factual finding unreasonable is the fact that no reasonable person—or, put differently, no "fairminded jurist"—could agree with it. I would therefore make this explicit in the panel decision.

 

