.
There is another, fundamental concern implicated here that has not been addressed in our cases. Title VII hostile workplace cases raise troublesome questions of how and when employee speech may be regulated. Concerns about free expression are especially pronounced in cases like this one where the allegations of hostility are apparently based on an employee's affirmations of faith and belief to another employee. The problem arises when the listener is "offended" by the speech because it is "unwanted" or "uncomfortable." The offensiveness of the speech is surely rooted in the message being conveyed. The message then becomes the basis of a hostile workplace. While Title VII rightly condemns acts of religious discrimination in the workplace, the line between permissible religious commentary in the workplace and a religiously hostile workplace quickly becomes fuzzy. That is especially true where, as here, there is no record evidence that the plaintiff was terminated "because of [his] religion."  42 U.S.C. ยง 2000e-2(a).
We have previously held that the First Amendment generally does not preclude a hostile work environment claim "in the context of a sexual harassment action." Baty v. Willamette Indus., Inc., 172 F.3d 1232, 1247 (10th Cir. 1999). We have not had the occasion, however, to discuss the contours of the application of the doctrine to specific cases of religious speech by employees in the workplace, especially where the complainant attempts to hold the employer vicariously liable for religious-oriented speech by its employees.
There is a growing body of commentary regarding these difficult issues. See, e.g., Eugene Volokh, What Speech Does "Hostile Work Environment" Harassment Law Restrict?, 85 Geo. L.J. 627 (1997), available in substantially updated form at http:// www.law.ucla.edu/faculty/volokh/harass/breadth.htm; Kingsley R. Browne, Zero Tolerance for the First Amendment: Title VII's Regulation of Employee Speech, 27 Ohio N.U. L. Rev. 563 (2001); Kimball E. Gilmer & Jeffrey M. Anderson, Zero Tolerance for God?: Religious Expression in the Workplace After Ellerth and Faragher, 42 How. L.J. 327, 344-45 (1999); see also Saxe v. State College Area Sch. Dist., 240 F.3d 200, 210 (3d Cir. 2001) (examining anti-harassment policies); but see Robinson v. Jacksonville, 760 F. Supp. 1486, 1534-37 (N.D. Fla. 1991) (listing six grounds for upholding hostile work environment claim against First Amendment challenge). Had plaintiff succeeded here in overturning summary judgment on the existing record, these issues could well have taken center stage as the facts became more developed on remand.
HOLLOWAY, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I concur in the majority's disposition of the discriminatory/retaliatory transfer  claim. But I respectfully dissent from the majority's disposition of the hostile work environment claim.
As a threshold matter, the district court rejected the idea that any "comment or proselytizing on behalf of Plaintiff's Christian supervisor [could have] caused [plaintiff], who is also a Christian, to suffer any intentional discrimination because of religion." 1  Aplt. App. at 174. The majority opinion did not have to address this categorical dismissal of Christian-on-Christian religious harassment, as it affirms the rejection of plaintiff's hostile work environment claim for lack of the requisite severe/pervasive hostility. Given my disagreement with the majority on the latter point, it is incumbent upon me to explain briefly why I would not concur in the result on the basis of the former rationale alternatively relied upon by the district court, i.e., why I conclude a supervisor's religious hostility that is otherwise actionable does not cease to be so merely because a subordinate shares the same, broadly denominated, religious identity. 
The Sixth Circuit recognized some time ago that if a Christian employer's favorable treatment of a Christian employee depends on the nature or extent of the employee's perceived commitment to the employer's religious views or standards, an actionable religious animus exists. See Blalock v. Metals Trades, Inc., 775 F.2d 703, 704-05, 708 (6th Cir. 1985). In much broader but equally pertinent terms, this court has held that Title VII generally protects against "requirements of religious conformity," which includes "'all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief.'" Shapolia v. Los Alamos Nat'l Lab., 992 F.2d 1033, 1036 (10th Cir. 1993) (quoting 42 U.S.C. ยง 2000e(j)). Here, Carroll's efforts to impose on his subordinates a workplace conforming to his particular notions of Christian observance and belief fall within the compass of the statute, regardless of any commonality in their religious faith. 
I turn now to the severity of the hostility directed at plaintiff, which is the focus of my dissent from the majority's disposition. As the majority notes, the question is whether "a rational jury could find that the workplace is permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult, that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim's employment and create an abusive working environment." Davis v. United States Postal Serv., 142 F.3d 1334, 1341 (10th Cir. 1998) (quotations omitted). We must look to "all the circumstances involved in the situation," including "the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it [was] physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interfered with [plaintiff's] work performance," and assess whether "the environment would be reasonably perceived (objectively) and [was] perceived (subjectively), as hostile or abusive." Nieto v. Kapoor, 268 F.3d 1208, 1218, 1220 (10th Cir. 2001) (quotation omitted).
Regarding frequency, plaintiff testified that Carroll subjected him (and his co-workers, with customers observing) 2  to an  incessant barrage of religious peroration and intimidation, including hourly harassment on the sales floor and involuntary prayer meetings in his office. Aplt. App. 83-86, 88. As for severity, I cannot discount as a minor workplace irritant the constant religious bullying and threats of damnation cited by plaintiff, particularly as Carroll claimed to have the power to deprive him of his job, see id. at 84 (depo. at 37). The offensiveness, if not humiliation, involved was heightened by the fact that these were not just private exchanges but often quite public statements. And plaintiff testified this conduct directly interfered with his job in at least two different ways: Carroll's intemperate religious comments on the sales floor drove customers away, see id. at 83 (depo. at 36), 86 (depo. at 45), and Carroll stopped training and assisting him once their religious conflict arose, see id. at 88 (depo. at 53). In connection with these last allegations, I note that defendant's stated reason for plaintiff's inter-store transfer - his very poor sales performance at the store where Carroll worked - while a legitimate justification undercutting plaintiff's challenge to his transfer, is entirely consistent with his hostile work environment claim.
 The points made above regarding frequency, severity, offensiveness, and interference with performance indicate to me that plaintiff's work environment could reasonably be perceived as hostile or abusive by anyone whose religious views or deportment elicited Carroll's denunciation or intrusive proselytizing. And plaintiff certainly indicated that he perceived the environment in that way. See also id. at 91-93. 
On the record developed thus far, which concededly may be skewed by the prominence of plaintiff's testimony, I cannot say that defendant has negated the existence of a triable case on the factors that control the disposition of plaintiff's hostile environment claim. I would therefore reverse the entry of summary judgment for the defendant on this one particular aspect of the case and remand for further proceedings.  
