.
I think the "clear error" standard of review compels us to affirm the decision of the district court.
Under Utah law, the fact-finder's determination that the consequential damages a party sought were not "reasonably certain" is a question of fact. See, e.g., Sawyers v. FMA Leasing Co., 722 P.2d 773, 774 (Utah 1986) ("Plaintiff, of course, has the burden to produce a sufficient evidentiary basis to establish the fact of damages and to permit the trier of fact to determine with reasonable certainty the amount of lost net profits.") (emphasis added). And when a party appeals from a bench trial, we review the district court's factual findings for clear error. See, e.g., Leathers v. Leathers, 856 F.3d 729, 762 (10th Cir. 2017); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 52(a)(6) ("Findings of fact, whether based on oral or other evidence, must not be set aside unless clearly erroneous, and the reviewing court must give due regard to the trial court's opportunity to judge the witnesses' credibility.").
Clear-error review is, of course, a high bar for Trans-Western to overcome. "If the district court's account of the evidence is plausible in light of the record viewed in its entirety, [we] may not reverse it even though convinced that had [we] been sitting as the trier of fact, [we] would have weighed the evidence differently." Anderson v. City of Bessemer City, 470 U.S. 564, 573-74, 105 S. Ct. 1504, 84 L. Ed. 2d 518 (1985). "To reverse under [the clear-error] standard requires that, based on the entire evidence, we have a 'definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed.'" O'Toole v. Northrop Grumman Corp., 499 F.3d 1218, 1221 (10th Cir. 2007) (quoting Easley v. Cromartie, 532 U.S. 234, 242, 121 S. Ct. 1452, 149 L. Ed. 2d 430 (2001)). As a result, "[w]here there are two permissible views of the evidence, the factfinder's choice between them cannot be clearly erroneous." City of Bessemer, 470 U.S. at 574.
 The "reasonable certainty" of consequential damages is an area of the law that leaves much to the discretion of the fact-finder. As Judge Cardozo explained long ago, "[n]o formula can be framed, regardless of experience, to tell us in advance when approximate certainty may be attained. The rule of damages must give true expression to the realities of life." Broadway Photoplay Co. v. World Film Corp., 225 N.Y. 104, 121 N.E. 756, 757 (N.Y. 1919).
Given the highly deferential standard of review—and the essentially discretionary legal standard—nothing in the record convinces me the district court's assessment of the valuation's certainty was less than plausible. To be sure, Trans-Western could have made large profits by assigning the lease when the market was hot. But it is by no means "certain" it would have—or how much those profits would have been. Speculating in oil and gas leases is a risky business, as much art as science in deciding when exactly to sell. The district court thought it could not be "reasonably certain" when and whether Trans-Western would have sold. In the court's view, Trans-Western failed to prove that it would have been able to foresee the "hot" market, that it would have held onto the lease until the time when the market was hot, or that it would have received an offer at a price it was willing to accept. That finding falls within the district court's purview.
Neither did Trans-Western need to adopt such a bold strategy. Indeed, it had more conservative options available. For instance, presenting a moving average of one or more similar assets over the time period at issue might have mitigated uncertainty over the date of sale. Or Trans-Western could have discounted its desired sale figure to adjust for hindsight bias. Maybe the district court would have accepted an argument that Trans-Western would have sold at $100 an acre, rather than $2,500. But Trans-Western aimed for a higher award—a higher-risk approach—and it just did not work.
Finally, the majority points to U.S. Gypsum's failure to put on evidence. But U.S. Gypsum decided its best defense was arguing the damages were too speculative to be awarded. That is a strategy best advanced by cross-examining the plaintiff's witness, rather than providing clues in a rebuttal case that might give Trans-Western an idea on how to bolster its case for a higher valuation.
I would therefore affirm the district court under the clear-error standard of review.

 

