.
I agree with the majority's determination that Mr. Gonzalez-Fierro's 2009 expedited-removal order was not fundamentally unfair under 8 U.S.C. § 1326(d)(3). Nevertheless, I do not believe we possess jurisdiction to reach that question.
I would AFFIRM the judgment of the district court that it lacked jurisdiction to consider the merits of the prior removal order.
 A. Jurisdiction
Gonzalez-Fierro was removed from the United States pursuant to the expedited-removal process established by Congress in 1996. See 8 U.S.C. § 1225(b)(1)(A)(i) (2006). This process permits immigration officers to order an arriving alien removed "without further hearing or review" if the alien lacks valid entry documents or has sought to obtain entry by misrepresentation, unless the alien indicates an intent to apply for asylum or states a fear of persecution. § 1225(b)(1)(A). Congress also granted the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) discretion to extend the expedited-removal procedure to certain other classes of aliens. See § 1225(b)(1)(A)(iii).
In 2004, DHS announced it would consider for expedited removal any alien encountered within 100 miles of the border who had not established continuous physical presence in the United States for the prior 14 days. See Designating Aliens for Expedited Removal, 69 Fed. Reg. 48,877-01, 48,880 (Aug. 11, 2004).1  Aliens meeting  these criteria were considered "applicants for admission" into the United States, regardless of whether they sought to enter at a port of entry or had already entered the country. See § 1225(a)(1). Thus, when Gonzalez-Fierro was apprehended within 100 miles of the border shortly after his 2009 entry, he was considered an applicant for admission qualified for expedited removal.
When an immigration official determines an alien will be subject to expedited removal, he takes a sworn statement from the alien using Form I-867. 8 C.F.R. § 235.3(b)(2)(i). According to this form, the statement's purpose is to determine the alien's admissibility: "If a decision is made to refuse your admission into the United States, you may be immediately removed from this country, and if so, you may be barred from reentry for a period of 5 years or longer." R. V.I., 42. The form describes the procedure for raising a claim of asylum or fear of persecution. The immigration officer records the alien's answers to questions about identity, alienage, and admissibility on the form; reads the statement to the alien; and instructs the alien to sign each page of the statement. 8 C.F.R. § 235.3(b)(2)(i). The officer then reads the charges of inadmissibility and gives the alien an opportunity to respond in the sworn statement. If immigration officials determine the alien should be removed, they serve the alien with Form I-860—the Notice and Order of Expedited Removal. Unless the alien claims asylum, voices fear of persecution, or claims to be a lawful permanent resident, refugee, asylee, or U.S. citizen, he is not entitled to a hearing or appeal. 8 U.S.C. § 1225(b)(1)(A), (b)(1)(C); 8 C.F.R. § 235.3(b)(2)(ii). Importantly, § 1225 also prohibits collateral attacks on expedited-removal orders if the alien is prosecuted for illegal reentry. 8 U.S.C. § 1225(b)(1)(D) ("In any action brought against an alien under section 1325(a) of this title or section 1326 of this title, the court shall not have jurisdiction to hear any claim attacking the validity of an order of removal entered under subparagraph (A)(i) or (B)(iii).").
Under these provisions, any claim that the district court had jurisdiction to hear Gonzalez-Fierro's collateral attack on his 2009 removal plainly contradicts the statutory scheme. He was prosecuted under § 1326 on the basis of a prior removal under § 1225(b)(1)(A)(i), and under § 1225 we lack jurisdiction to hear "any claim attacking the validity of an order of removal."
The REAL ID Act (8 U.S.C. § 1252) also forecloses jurisdiction. Passed in 2005, the Act imposes "substantial limitations on judicial review . . . of final orders of removal." Thoung v. United States, 913 F.3d 999, 1001 (10th Cir. 2019). Except as provided in circumstances not relevant here, the REAL ID Act states:
Notwithstanding any other provision of law (statutory or nonstatutory), . . . no court shall have jurisdiction to review . . . any individual determination or to entertain any other cause or claim arising from or relating to the implementation or operation of an order of removal pursuant to section 1225(b)(1) of this title, . . . .
8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(A)(i) (emphasis added). No court has jurisdiction to review "the application of [§ 1225(b)(1)] to individual aliens" or "procedures and policies adopted by the Attorney General to implement the provisions of [that section]."  § 1252(a)(2)(A)(iii)-(iv). According to § 1252(a)(5), petitions for review filed with the courts of appeal are the "sole and exclusive means for judicial review from an order of removal."
Either statute would suffice to deprive both the district court and this court of jurisdiction to consider Gonzalez-Fierro's collateral attack on his § 1225 removal.
 B. Due Process Claim
Because the majority ultimately assumes the jurisdiction-stripping portions of those statutes are unconstitutional, it holds the district court had jurisdiction to consider the collateral attack in spite of clear statutory language to the contrary.2  I am not persuaded.
As an initial matter, Gonzalez-Fierro did not raise in the district court the same due process claim he now raises on appeal. In district court, Gonzalez-Fierro relied on United States v. Mendoza-Lopez, 481 U.S. 828, 107 S. Ct. 2148, 95 L. Ed. 2d 772 (1987), to argue the Due Process Clause entitles him to challenge via collateral attack the fairness of the 2009 expedited-removal order. The government countered that the district court lacked jurisdiction to consider the attack because 8 U.S.C. § 1252 specifically denies courts jurisdiction to review collateral attacks against expedited-removal orders under § 1225(b)(1). Gonzalez-Fierro in turn simply reiterated his right to judicial review under Mendoza-Lopez. He never addressed the constitutionality of § 1225, and he never directly addressed the constitutionality of § 1252.3 
For the first time on appeal, Gonzalez-Fierro specifically challenges the constitutionality of those jurisdiction-stripping provisions. Although Mendoza-Lopez involved a formal deportation proceeding for which Congress had provided a statutory right to judicial review, Gonzalez-Fierro argues it stands for the broader proposition that "meaningful review" must extend to all removals used as elements of reentry charges. The majority accepts that logic, and it is persuaded that Gonzalez-Fierro's vague due process argument preserved the issue of § 1225's constitutionality.
I disagree. The majority rightly notes that Gonzalez-Fierro made an argument before the district court about the constitutionality of his conviction under § 1326 using the same constitutional logic that he now employs against § 1225. But he did not specifically apply that logic to either § 1225 or the jurisdiction-stripping statute identified by the government, § 1252. His general objection is not sufficient to preserve the more specific argument Gonzalez-Fierro now makes on appeal because "a bare assertion does not preserve a claim." See Craven v. Univ. of Colo. Hosp. Auth., 260 F.3d 1218, 1226 (10th Cir. 2001).
For the sake of argument, we might read his contention below as a specific argument against § 1326, the statute under which he was convicted. Read in this way, Gonzalez-Fierro's original constitutional argument against § 1326 closely resembles the one he raises on appeal against § 1225. Each relies on Mendoza-Lopez to suggest that a statute violates the defendant's due process rights. Still, "when a defendant pursues a particular theory or objection,  but fails to raise another closely related argument, he has forfeited the argument and we review only for plain error." United States v. Burke, 571 F.3d 1048, 1057 (10th Cir. 2009). So, even if we grant that Gonzalez-Fierro preserved an argument, it would be inappropriate to conclude that he preserved this argument. By recycling the logic of his original theory and marshaling it with some specificity against a different statute, Gonzalez-Fierro has attempted to disguise a novel theory as one that he has already argued. This does not satisfy our standards for preservation. See id.
Because Gonzalez-Fierro failed to raise his constitutional argument against those provisions with specificity before the district court, I would review—if at all—for plain error. See United States v. Courtney, 816 F.3d 681, 684 (10th Cir. 2016). We conduct our plain-error analysis "less rigidly when reviewing a potential constitutional error." United States v. Dazey, 403 F.3d 1147, 1174 (10th Cir. 2005).
But any error that occurred here is not plain:
For an error to be plain, it must be clear or obvious at the time of the appeal. An error is clear or obvious when it is contrary to well-settled law. For us to characterize a proposition of law as well-settled, we normally require precedent directly on point from the Supreme Court or our Circuit or a consensus in the other circuits.
United States v. Christy, 916 F.3d 814, 858 (10th Cir. 2019) (emphasis in original) (internal citations omitted). It is not established under well-settled law that § 1225(b)(1)(D) is unconstitutional. Gonzalez-Fierro and the majority assert that Mendoza-Lopez renders the law unconstitutional. They read that case to require categorically the United States to provide judicial review for deportation proceedings in the form of collateral attack when those proceedings are used as a predicate for reentry prosecutions. Gonzalez-Fierro and the majority over-read Mendoza-Lopez.
The Supreme Court determined in Mendoza-Lopez—which long predates expedited removal—that defendants facing criminal reentry charges predicated on prior removals must have the opportunity to challenge collaterally those prior removals where any "deportation proceeding effectively eliminates the right of the alien to obtain judicial review." 481 U.S. at 839. Gonzalez-Fierro reads Mendoza-Lopez to require judicial review for all deportation proceedings, including those governed by § 1225. But that case dealt only with procedural flaws in deportation proceedings that deprived aliens of existing rights to judicial review.4 
What is notable about Mendoza-Lopez is that the statute provided the defendants the right to appeal or to apply for suspension of deportation. The expedited-removal scheme clearly did not provide Gonzalez-Fierro the same. And as I explained above, the statute under which he was deported explicitly denies him the right to any judicial review.
Because of this difference, Mendoza-Lopez does not clearly bear on the circumstances of Gonzalez-Fierro's case.  Mendoza-Lopez did not address a prior proceeding in which Congress explicitly denied a statutory right to judicial review in the first place. Reasonable jurists may, then, disagree as to whether Mendoza-Lopez applies to the expedited-removal context. It is true that two other circuit courts have held § 1225(b)(1)(D) unconstitutional relying on Mendoza-Lopez. See United States v. Villarreal Silva, 931 F.3d 330, 2019 WL 3330446, at *3—*5 (4th Cir. 2019); United States v. Barajas-Alvarado, 655 F.3d 1077, 1081-88 (9th Cir. 2011). But out-of-circuit precedent does not bind the district court; nor does it render that court's faithful application of the statute plain error.5 
Nor can Gonzalez-Fierro satisfy the third prong of our plain-error review. "Satisfying the third prong of plain-error review—that the error affects substantial rights—usually means that the error must have affected the outcome of the district court proceedings." United States v. Gonzalez-Huerta, 403 F.3d 727, 732 (10th Cir. 2005). Because he cannot satisfy the requirements of § 1326(d), Gonzalez-Fierro cannot demonstrate the district court's decision affected his substantial rights.6  To have achieved a different outcome, Gonzalez-Fierro needed to prove the 2009 expedited-removal proceeding was fundamentally unfair. See § 1326(d)(3) (requiring the alien demonstrate that "the entry of the [deportation] order was fundamentally unfair" in order to challenge its validity). He argues the prior proceeding was unfair because: (1) DHS failed to tailor the advisement of his rights to his age; (2) this failure led him to waive rights he failed to appreciate fully; and (3) such waiver eliminated the possibility that a citizen relative could have petitioned for adjustment of status on his behalf.
As the majority correctly concludes, this argument fails for numerous reasons. First, Gonzalez-Fierro did not provide the district court with anything but the bare assertion that—contrary to his 2009 sworn statement—he was indeed a minor when he was removed. Even if Gonzalez-Fierro were lying in 2009, he can hardly blame DHS for relying on his sworn representation. Second, if he were a minor in 2009, Gonzalez-Fierro would not have been eligible for expedited removal at all. See 8 U.S.C. § 1232. So, the counterfactual argument that Gonzalez-Fierro would have been entitled to additional procedural protections in the expedited-removal proceeding makes little sense. Finally, there appears to be no mechanism by which a citizen relative can file a petition for adjustment of status in the expedited-removal context. See § 1225(b)(1)(A)(i) ("[T]he officer shall order the alien removed from the United States without further hearing or review unless the alien indicates either an intention to apply for asylum . . . or a fear of persecution." (emphasis added)). Gonzalez-Fierro cannot demonstrate his youth caused him to waive unknowingly his right to a hearing that would establish eligibility for relief, because no such right existed.
For these reasons, Gonzalez-Fierro's constitutional challenge fails under plain-error review.
But even if I were to review de novo, I would not conclude § 1225(b)(1)(D) is unconstitutional. Mendoza-Lopez stands for the proposition that "a collateral challenge to the use of a deportation proceeding as an element of a criminal offense must be permitted where the deportation proceeding effectively eliminates the right of the alien to obtain judicial review." 481 U.S. at 839. Reading this pronouncement in context, it only requires collateral challenges be available where they are necessary to preserve an existing right to obtain judicial review. Under then-existing law, aliens possessed a statutory right to judicial review of their deportation proceedings.7  Mendoza-Lopez does not, then, recognize a free-standing right to review of a prior removal proceeding that constitutes an element in a subsequent criminal proceeding. The better reading reaffirms that the Due Process Clause ensures a defendant's existing statutory rights to judicial review. As the expedited-removal statute confers no right to judicial review, no collateral challenge need be permitted under Mendoza-Lopez.
It is elemental that the Constitution grants Congress the power to shape and limit the appellate jurisdiction of federal courts. See U.S. Const. Art. III, § 2, cl. 2 ("In all the other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make."). Wide latitude to withhold jurisdiction from inferior federal courts lives within the permissive language of the Exceptions Clause and the Madisonian Compromise that granted the legislative branch power to create the inferior courts. See Patchak v. Zinke, 138 S. Ct. 897, 906, 200 L. Ed. 2d 92 (2018); see also U.S. Const. Art. III, § 1, cl. 2; Art. I, § 8, cl. 9.
The Supreme Court has identified as axiomatic the principle that "Congress may withhold from any court of its creation jurisdiction of any of the enumerated controversies. Courts created by statute can have no jurisdiction but such as the statute confers." Sheldon v. Sill, 49 U.S. 441, 449, 12 L. Ed. 1147 (1850). These structural safeguards serve a separation-of-powers purpose as an important check against the accretion of power to the federal judiciary. Without the grant of statutory power of review, Gonzalez-Fierro is not entitled to judicial review of the underlying expedited-removal order.
* * *
For the foregoing reasons, I concur in the judgment and would AFFIRM the judgment of the district court.

 

