
Mr. Elliott was properly convicted on four separate counts of possession of child pornography. Under 18 U.S.C. § 2252A(a)(5)(B), a person who "knowingly possesses, or knowingly accesses with intent to view, any book, magazine, periodical, film, videotape, computer disk, or any other material that contains an image of child pornography . . ." will be subject to prosecution. (emphases added). Mr. Elliott pleaded guilty to possessing an extensive collection of child pornography—which, in the aggregate, contained over 8000 images and videos—across four separate storage devices. I am satisfied that § 2252A(a)(5)(B) permits four discrete convictions for possession under these circumstances.
But the majority opinion concludes the statutory term "any" creates an unacceptable ambiguity, such that discrete convictions premised upon each storage device will prove unconstitutional. This conclusion disregards a bevy of cases in which we have observed that proof of separate storage or receipt will support multiple convictions for the possession of contraband, regardless of whatever ambiguity the statutory term "any" may create.
For example, in United States v. Long, 787 F.2d 538, 539 (10th Cir. 1986), we examined the federal mail-theft statute, which applies to anyone who "unlawfully has in his possession, any letter . . ." (emphasis in original) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 1708). We acknowledged "the use of the word 'any' under these circumstances creates an ambiguity." Id. (citing United States v. Valentine, 706 F.2d 282, 293 (10th Cir. 1983)). And that, ordinarily, "[a]mbiguity in the definition of conduct to be punished by a criminal statute must be settled against turning a single transaction into multiple offenses." Id. (same). But—most importantly—we concluded this presumption could be overcome by "a showing of separate receipt or separate storage" of stolen mail. Id.
In Valentine, we likewise considered two statutes that dealt with firearms and convicted felons. The first prohibited convicted felons from "receiv[ing] any firearm or ammunition . . ." 706 F.2d at 292 (emphasis in original) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 922(h)). And the second proscribed felons from "receiv[ing], possess[ing], or transport[ing] . . . any firearm . . ." Id. (emphasis in original) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 1202(a)). Despite once again acknowledging some ambiguity in both statutes, we followed the guidance of "[o]ther courts [that] have uniformly reached the same conclusion" in observing "a showing of separate receipt or storage" can overcome the presumption against multiple convictions. Id. at 293.1 
I would employ this same approach in construing 18 U.S.C. § 2252A(a)(5)(B) to foreclose Mr. Elliott's challenge. Mr. Elliott  possessed four different storage devices that contained child pornography—an iPhone, a digital hard drive, a desktop computer, and a Dropbox storage account.2  Nobody would dispute the inference that each device came into his possession separately, or that the storage and receipt of all 8000-plus proscribed images and videos did not take place at the same time.
I accordingly would follow the blueprint drawn up by the Fifth Circuit, which has held the possession of multiple devices under similar circumstances may support multiple charges under § 2252A(a)(5)(B). In United States v. Planck, 493 F.3d 501 (5th Cir. 2007), the court rejected a nearly identical challenge to multiple convictions for possession of child pornography under § 2252A(a)(5)(B). The defendant—who was found to have possessed thousands of images depicting child pornography across a desktop computer, laptop computer, and 223 computer diskettes—argued his three convictions were multiplicitous.
The court reasoned each instance of separate storage or receipt may support a unique conviction for possession, observing "the desktop, laptop, and diskettes [the defendant] possessed were three separate types of material or media, each capable of independently storing images of child pornography." Id. at 504 (emphasis added). Because "the actus reus is the possession of child pornography[,] the [g]overnment need only prove the defendant possessed the contraband at a single place and time to establish a single act of possession and, therefore, a single crime. Through different transactions, Planck possessed child pornography in three separate places—a laptop and desktop computer and diskettes—and, therefore, committed three separate crimes." Id. at 505 (citations omitted). "A contrary result," the court noted "would allow amassing a warehouse of child pornographic material—books, movies, computer images—with only a single count of possession as a potential punishment." Id. at 504.3 
The circumstances in this case are nearly identical. Four devices seized from Mr. Elliott's home contained—in the aggregate—several thousand images and videos. At a minimum, the inference that each device contained images or videos acquired through a distinct transaction is permissible. But it likewise necessarily follows that each device was, as in Planck, "capable of independently storing images of child pornography." See id. at 504 (emphasis added). That they were seized from the same room is therefore immaterial; for the law prohibits only the images and videos stored in each separate device, rather than the device itself.
The majority disputes this reasoning and accordingly disregards Planck, contending "[p]ossession of the storage device is the actus reus of the statute." Maj. Op. at 10, n.4 (emphasis in original). But this characterization ignores the reality that the images and the videos stored on the devices create the social harm Congress sought to proscribe. Absent the proscribed images and videos, possession of the storage devices alone would constitute no crime.
 I would AFFIRM the judgment of the district court. I accordingly dissent.

 

