
I conclude the district court adequately informed Mr. Hamett of the dangers of self-representation. Our precedents require a trial court to make sure a criminal defendant is aware of the dangers of self-representation, and they require us to review the lower court's statements through a pragmatic lens to be sure that it properly conveyed those dangers. But our cases do not require a judge to use a specific script. A pragmatic reading of the record suggests the district court adequately warned Mr. Hamett of the dangers of self-representation and, when he insisted he wanted to proceed pro se, gave him exactly the latitude he sought to direct his own defense. I accordingly dissent.
Randy Hamett broke into the home of his ex-wife by evading a security system, tased her from behind, and held her at gun point while threatening to kill her and others. He then bound her with zip ties, kidnapped her, and, during the ensuing 27 hours of terror, sexually assaulted her twice en route from Oklahoma to Arkansas. During the ordeal, the victim, while fearing for her life and others' the entire time, told Mr. Hamett that they could remarry as a ruse to buy time for the police to become aware of her plight. Her plan worked, and she was rescued from a hotel in Arkansas.
Mr. Hamett was indicted and tried for related kidnapping and gun crimes. As with any defendant, he was advised of the charges against him, and the indictment was provided to him and his lawyers. The government supplied Mr. Hamett two experienced trial lawyers who, we can safely assume, worked with him in preparing his defense and potential testimony.
During the first day of the two-day trial, Mr. Hamett became frustrated with those  lawyers. Only on the second day of trial and after the direct and cross-examination of his ex-wife did he advise the court that he wanted to represent himself. After a Faretta hearing he changed his mind. Then, after the government rested, he renewed his request to represent himself, with the ostensible reason that he wanted to question his ex-wife about her statements to him concerning travel to Arkansas to get remarried. The majority recounts the second Faretta hearing in some detail that I need not repeat. Suffice it to say, my interpretation of the events leading to the district court's ruling is that Mr. Hamett knew full well the nature of the charges against him, the elements of the crimes, and a line of defense that he wished to pursue during his case-in-chief. And judging by the questions he posed to his distraught ex-wife, it is clear he was challenging her credibility and advancing a theory that he did not willingly engage in kidnapping since she was not coerced into traveling to Arkansas. In fact, I read the record to suggest his conduct was a knowing and intelligent attack on the victim and a manipulation of the judicial process.
As we have observed, "[a] lawyer cannot be forced upon a defendant who wishes to waive his right to counsel[,] even if self-representation would be detrimental." United States v. Turner, 287 F.3d 980, 983 (10th Cir. 2002) (emphasis added) (citing Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806, 834, 95 S. Ct. 2525, 45 L. Ed. 2d 562 (1975)). Moreover, as the majority has noted, the Supreme Court has not "prescribed any formula or script to be read to a defendant who states that he elects to proceed without counsel." United States v. Hansen, 929 F.3d 1238, 1251 (10th Cir. 2019) (quoting Iowa v. Tovar, 541 U.S. 77, 88, 124 S. Ct. 1379, 158 L. Ed. 2d 209 (2004)). That no specific formula would be necessary makes more sense in this unusual mid-trial context.
In light of this flexible standard and the district court's substantial (even if imperfect) warnings to the defendant, I do not believe we should credit Mr. Hamett's request for a judicial do-over. It is rare, after all, that a criminal defendant first decides to represent himself mid-trial and then challenges his conviction on the basis of having his request granted. But it is not without precedent. E.g., Wilson v. Hurt, 29 Fed. App'x 324, 329 (6th Cir. 2002) (holding a mid-trial switch to self-representation did not violate a habeas petitioner's Sixth Amendment rights where the state court advised him to not undertake his own defense, required counsel to remain on standby, advised the defendant of his responsibilities, and informed him he would need to follow the federal rules of evidence).
The non-formulaic requirements of Faretta hearings are logically less onerous in cases like this one. Unlike in a pre-trial or even an early-trial Faretta hearing, here we can assume the defendant was familiar with the charges against him, the government's theory of the case, and his counsel's plan of defense. After all, he was present when the indictment was read to the jury; he sat through the entirety of the government's case-in-chief, including its examination of the victim; and he told the district court he disagreed with his counsel's plan. The morning he twice asked to represent himself he was also witness to his defense counsel's half-time motion for acquittal under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 29, in which it was argued that the government had failed to establish the requisite mens rea to commit kidnapping.
The fact that Mr. Hamett surely knew, at least broadly speaking, the background factors set forth in Von Moltke because of his experience at trial does not, as the majority points out, excuse the district  court from conveying those factors in a general sense. See Von Moltke v. Gillies, 332 U.S. 708, 724, 68 S. Ct. 316, 92 L. Ed. 309 (1948) (listing the factors); United States v. Padilla, 819 F.2d 952, 957 (10th Cir. 1987) (stating "the factors articulated must be conveyed to the defendant by the trial judge and appear on the record"). Still, conveying them is necessarily easier, and requires less, when the factors are already obvious to the defendant, as they were here. If the ultimate purpose of our appellate review of a Faretta hearing is to be sure that the trial court properly conveyed to the criminal defendant "the magnitude of the undertaking and the hazards inherent in self-representation," Padilla, 819 F.2d at 956, there is necessarily some subjective element baked into the requirements of Faretta that can excuse deviations from a script. That is the case here.
The district court opened the second Faretta colloquy by emphasizing the "dangers and possible pitfalls of proceeding pro se." R. at 31:5. The court also noted that Mr. Hamett lacked his appointed counsel's expertise in the rules of evidence and procedure, and it underscored the seriousness of this point by speculating that Mr. Hamett might not obtain answers to the questions he sought to ask on account of potential objections from the government. Mr. Hamett, in turn, acknowledged he was "not learned in the law" and would "be at a disadvantage in examining witnesses." Id. at 33:20-22, 34:23-35:1.
The trial court also ensured Mr. Hamett recognized he would need to tie the evidence he adduced to the elements of the charged offense and would need to present all of this in a closing argument. And while the court declined to read out the elements of the charges in this mid-trial context, it explained to Mr. Hamett that he could find the elements within the proposed jury instructions already in his and his counsel's possession. The trial court additionally highlighted the seriousness of the charges, specifying albeit incorrectly twenty years as the potential maximum term of imprisonment. And the court reiterated that Mr. Hamett might stand a better chance of acquittal if he permitted his appointed counsel to present his case.
Despite its surprise at Mr. Hamett's last-minute gamble, the district court repeatedly sought to impress "the inherent difficulties of self-representation" upon Mr. Hamett. Still, Mr. Hamett clearly expressed his desire to pursue a trial strategy his appointed counsel evidently believed unwise. He responded affirmatively when the court asked: "It's really a strategic issue, right, isn't that correct, and you want to ask some questions they haven't asked[?]" Id. at 39:15-17. In my view, the trial court made obvious the dangers of self-representation. Having thereby fulfilled its duty under Faretta, the court then gave Mr. Hamett exactly the opportunity he sought, and then some. Not only did the district court permit him to direct his own defense; it also ensured standby counsel familiar with both facts and law could assist him.
* * *
The majority opinion identifies three fatal shortcomings in the district court's Faretta colloquy and concludes that these shortcomings require reversal. In the view of the majority, the district court: (1) failed to ensure on the record that Mr. Hamett understood the charges against him; (2) misstated the maximum applicable sentence in the event of conviction; and (3) failed to discuss available defenses to the charges. I do not believe any of these objections to the colloquy warrant overturning Mr. Hamett's conviction.
It is true that the district court did not read aloud the jury instructions Mr. Hamett and his appointed counsel already possessed,  and that because the jury was waiting the district court also did not allot him time to review the jury instructions silently. That said, Mr. Hamett was represented by appointed counsel during the hearing, and his lawyers made no objection to the colloquy or the court's granting the request. The district court also ensured that counsel remain on standby to assist the defendant with objections to the jury instructions. Moreover, while the record suggests Mr. Hamett wanted more time to review the elements of the charged crimes, it also seems to suggest that he understood the nature of the charges. His examination of witnesses and closing argument much of which was devoted to the contention that he lacked the necessary "unlawful intent" to support a guilty verdict demonstrates some level of understanding of both the elements of the crimes and the need for him to address those elements.
It is likewise true that the district court misstated the maximum applicable sentence in the event of conviction, indicating Mr. Hamett would face a maximum applicable sentence of twenty years rather than life in prison. But while our precedents suggest a judge should remind a defendant seeking to represent himself what the possible sentence could be if his self-representation fails, no authorities suggest the error here is so egregious as to be dispositive. Indeed, the error seems immaterial. As the government observes, the prospect of twenty years' imprisonment for the sixty-two-year-old Mr. Hamett amounted to constructive notice of the possibility he would spend the rest of his life in prison, if convicted. He effectively acknowledged the severity of his potential sentence (and the ramifications of his self-representation) by saying: "This is, as you put it, this is my life so I'm not going to play games." Id. at 388. The district court's error, then, did not undermine the knowing and intelligent nature of Mr. Hamett's scheme.
It is also true that the district court did not apprise Mr. Hamett of possible defenses. But the very fact that Mr. Hamett sought in the middle of his trial, no less to dismiss appointed counsel over differences in strategy suggests to me that he had settled on a strategy and, therefore, a defense and did not need to be apprised of others. In his closing argument, he raised a legal defense based on the elements of the charges arguing that he lacked the requisite unlawful intent to sustain a conviction for kidnapping. The fact that he raised such a defense, as dubious as it might have been, and not one prepared by his appointed counsel, indicates to me that Mr. Hamett raised the defense he had concluded best suited his interests. It was his right to choose that defense over any other, and it seems problematic to provide him with a judicial mulligan simply because his preferred strategy ultimately proved unwise. See Turner, 287 F.3d at 983.
In my view, the district court provided Mr. Hamett exactly the latitude he sought to direct his own defense. All the shortcomings the majority opinion identifies with the Faretta colloquy can be attributed to the fact that Mr. Hamett waited until the middle of trial to dismiss his appointed counsel. Moreover, none of them were so material as to undermine the knowing and intelligent nature of the defendant's waiver. I accordingly think the circumstances excuse those shortcomings and respectfully dissent.

 

