, dissenting.
In dismissing these appeals for lack of jurisdiction, the Majority Opinion misapplies well-established standards for appellate jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1). This consolidated case involves appeals of two orders — one that had the practical effect of refusing a motion for a preliminary injunction, the other that expressly dismissed that motion. Precedent permits appellate review of orders with the practical effect of denying a motion for a preliminary injunction. And the text of § 1292(a)(1) allows interlocutory appeals of orders refusing such motions. Yet the Majority Opinion rejects appellate jurisdiction over appeals from both orders. By so doing, District Court's underlying basis for those orders — its application of the first-filed rule — will never be subject to meaningful appellate review. I see it differently, and I respectfully dissent.
I.
Under § 1292(a)(1), appellate jurisdiction extends to interlocutory orders that grant or deny injunctive relief:
The courts of appeals shall have jurisdiction of appeals from interlocutory orders of the district courts of the United States . . . granting . . . [or] refusing . . . injunctions.
28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1) (alterations omitted).
Beyond orders that expressly grant or refuse injunctive relief are those orders that have the practical effect of refusing an injunction. See 16 Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, Fed. Prac. & Proc. § 3924.1 (3d ed. Apr. 2020 update) ("Refusal of an explicit request for a preliminary injunction need not be express[;] [a] variety of actions or even inaction may have the same effect as an express refusal, supporting appeal."). Under the test announced in Carson v. American Brands, Inc., 450 U.S. 79, 101 S. Ct. 993, 67 L. Ed. 2d 59 (1981), orders with the practical effect of denying preliminary injunctive relief may be appealed under § 1292(a)(1) when three conditions are met:
1. The order has the practical effect of refusing an injunction;
2. The denial of immediate appellate review exposes a party to the risk of serious or irreparable harm; and
3. The denial of immediate appellate review causes a party to lose its opportunity to effectually challenge the interlocutory order.
See id. at 83-84; see also Rolo v. Gen. Dev. Corp., 949 F.2d 695, 702-03 (3d Cir. 1991); 11A Wright & Miller § 2962 (3d ed. Apr. 2020 updated) ("[A] district court may not avoid immediate review of its determination simply by failing to characterize or label its decision as one denying . . . injunctive relief." (emphasis added)).
I believe that both bases for interlocutory appeal — practical effect and express refusal — are available here. The District Court's first order, which stayed the case pending resolution of a suit in Texas (brought by only two of the seven appellants here), had the practical effect of refusing the appellants' motion for a preliminary injunction. And the second order, which dismissed appellants' motion for preliminary injunction without prejudice, had the actual effect of refusing their request for emergency relief.
II.
Unlike the Majority, I believe that the first order appealed — the March 7 stay order (Stay Order) - satisfies the Carson requirements.
A
Under the first Carson element, the Stay Order had the "practical effect of refusing an injunction." Carson, 450 U.S. at 84; see also Rolo, 949 F.2d at 702. As explained by the Supreme Court, "[t]h[e] 'practical effect' rule serves a valuable purpose[:] If an interlocutory injunction is improperly granted or denied, much harm can occur before the final decision in the district court." Abbott v. Perez, 138 S. Ct. 2305, 2319, 201 L. Ed. 2d 714 (2018). And before today, Circuit precedent recognized that a stay for an indeterminate period with a motion for injunctive relief pending sufficed as a basis for appellate jurisdiction because that stay "effectively denied [the movants] the ultimate relief that they seek." Rolo, 949 F.2d at 703 & n.5; see also Victaulic Co. v. Tieman, 499 F.3d 227, 232 (3d Cir. 2007) ("[T]his is an appeal from the (implicit) denial of the preliminary injunction, which, we have held, is the primary purpose of § 1292(a)(1)."). That is precisely the situation here. The District Court stayed a case with a pending motion for a preliminary injunction. That has the practical effect of denying that motion.
In avoiding that outcome, the Majority Opinion overextends dictum from Cohen v. Bd. of Trs., 867 F.2d 1455 (3d Cir. 1989) (en banc). See Maj. Op. at 9-12. That decision announced that "an order staying or refusing to stay an action for equitable relief does not fall under § 1292(a)(1), even though it postpones or accelerates resolution of an action seeking injunctive relief." Cohen, 867 F.2d at 1464 (emphasis added). But "an action for equitable relief" is not equivalent to 'a motion for a preliminary injunction,' as is present here. Indeed, this Court later clarified that staying such motions has the practical effect of denying preliminary injunctive relief under § 1292(a)(1): a "district court's refusal to entertain [a] motion [for injunctive relief by imposing an indeterminate stay] had precisely the same effect on the [movants] as would an order expressly denying that motion." Rolo, 949 F.2d at 703 n.5.
Nor does the Stay Order relate "only to the conduct or progress of litigation before that court." Gulfstream Aerospace Corp. v. Mayacamas Corp., 485 U.S. 271, 279, 108 S. Ct. 1133, 99 L. Ed. 2d 296 (1988) (emphasis added). It is not, for example, an order setting a briefing or a discovery schedule. See, e.g., Fed. R. Civ. P. 16(b) (scheduling orders); id. 37 (discovery orders). Rather, it is an indefinite stay that postpones the resolution of a pending motion for a preliminary injunction.
B
The second Carson requirement is also satisfied here because the Stay Order imposes a "serious, perhaps irreparable, consequence." Carson, 450 U.S. at 84. The seven appellants moved for a preliminary injunction, in part, to enjoin the deprivation of their First Amendment right to free speech. App. 94-143. And a deprivation of a First Amendment right creates a presumption of irreparable injury. See Neb. Press Ass'n v. Stuart, 423 U.S. 1327, 1329, 96 S. Ct. 251, 46 L. Ed. 2d 237 (1975) ("[A]ny First Amendment infringement that occurs with each passing day is irreparable.").1  I do not believe that presumption has been rebutted.
The Majority Opinion finds no irreparable injury here, however. It relies on the fact that appellants "could have withdrawn their action in Texas and pursued the New Jersey action." Maj. Op. at 15. But that explanation is at best incomplete as only two of the seven appellants sued in Texas. And even for those two common parties, the Majority Opinion places undue weight on the absence of a motion for a preliminary injunction in Texas — after all, that court determined that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the Attorney General of New Jersey. See Maj. Op. at 15 ("Plaintiffs' litigation strategy . . . belies an assertion of irreparable harm."). It is quite something to conclude that a party's First Amendment injury is not serious because that party — although moving for a preliminary injunction — did not move for a preliminary injunction in a separate case that was dismissed on personal jurisdiction grounds. See Victaulic, 499 F.3d at 232 ("[W]hether the appellant[s] moved for a preliminary injunction is evidence of the case's urgency.").
The Majority Opinion also dismisses the possibility of irreparable injury by reference to a nationwide injunction issued by a District Judge in the Western District of Washington. See Maj. Op. at 15-16 (citing Washington v. U.S. Dep't of State, -- F. Supp. 3d --, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 39608, 2020 WL 1083720, at *11 (W.D. Wash. Mar. 6, 2020)). That injunction — issued by a court with territorial jurisdiction over six counties2  - enjoins a final rule that would provide authorization under a statute, 22 U.S.C. § 2778(h), for some of the speech that the seven appellants seek to engage in. But here appellants seek to vindicate constitutional rights. Thus, even supposing both statutory and regulatory prohibitions on appellants' proposed speech, those alone do not extinguish appellants' First Amendment rights.
For these reasons, I believe that the presumption of serious, perhaps irreparable injury remains unrebutted here.
C
The third Carson element is likewise satisfied because the Stay Order can be "effectually challenged" only by immediate appeal. Carson, 450 U.S. at 84. This third consideration focuses on "whether the appellant[s] can get substantially similar relief without an immediate appeal." Victaulic, 499 F.3d at 232. But no such possibility exists for the Stay Order.
It is not an answer that by the terms of the Stay Order appellants can choose for themselves to proceed in New Jersey by dropping the Texas litigation. See Maj. Op. at 17-18 ("An appeal is not the only means of effectively challenging the orders, because Plaintiffs could receive a ruling on their preliminary injunction motion if they discontinue the Texas action." (internal quotation marks, alterations, and citation omitted)). Five appellants are not parties to the Texas case, and they have no such choice. But even if the remaining two appellants dismissed the Texas suit, that would not allow for a challenge to the Stay Order — by its own terms, the order would have expired then. In the meantime, the damage from the delay would have already been done without a meaningful opportunity for appellate review. See Goldberg v. 401 N. Wabash Venture LLC, 755 F.3d 456, 464 (7th Cir. 2014) ("The past cannot be recreated. Time runs in only one direction — and it's forward, not backward."). Thus, regardless of the choice available to two of the seven appellants, under today's ruling, the possibility of meaningful appellate review of the Stay Order is not merely postponed; it is eliminated.
It is true, as the Majority observes, that the Stay Order does not necessarily preclude forever the injunctive relief that appellants seek. But in my view such cold consolation — especially for the five appellants who are not parties to the Texas litigation and whose remedy, in the words of the District Court, is "to be patient," App. 1006 - does not suffice to satisfy the third Carson element. Instead of hinging on the continued availability of ultimate relief, that third consideration depends on the ability to meaningfully challenge the order that currently denies preliminary injunctive relief. See Carson, 450 U.S. at 86 ("In the instant case, unless the District Court order denying the motion to enter the consent decree is immediately appealable, petitioners will lose their opportunity to 'effectually challenge' an interlocutory order that denies them injunctive relief."); see also Neb. Press, 423 U.S. at 1329 ("[E]ach passing day may constitute a separate and cognizable infringement of the First Amendment."). Appellants here lack such an ability absent interlocutory appeal.
III.
The appeal of the District Court's second order (Dismissal Order) provides a separate and independent basis for appellate review under § 1292(a)(1). That order from August 29, 2019, "dismissed without prejudice" appellant's preliminary injunction motion and administratively closed the case. By doing so, the Dismissal Order unequivocally refused to grant appellants' request for interim injunctive relief. Due to that actual and express refusal to grant the preliminary injunction, there is no need to conduct the Carson 'practical effect' inquiry — the Dismissal Order constitutes an express refusal to grant an injunction, and it therefore qualifies for appellate review under the plain text of § 1292(a)(1).
The Majority Opinion attempts to minimize that reality by noting that the dismissal was 'without prejudice.' See Maj. Op. at 10-12. But for a denial of a preliminary injunction, such a qualifier is immaterial for purposes of appellate review under § 1292(a)(1). Whether the dismissal of the motion is with or without prejudice, appellants have most certainly not received the preliminary injunctive relief they requested. See Hoots v. Pennsylvania, 639 F.2d 972, 979 (3d Cir. 1981) ("Although the trial court denied the motion for an injunction 'without prejudice,' the effect of the denial was to preclude any possibility of granting the relief sought by appellants." (emphasis added)).3 
The Majority Opinion also looks beyond the text of the Dismissal Order to discredit the dismissal. See Maj. Op. at 10 ("The District Court's order 'dismissing' the motion for a preliminary injunction also does not qualify as a denial of an injunction[,] [because] [w]hile the Court used the word 'dismiss,' a fair reading of the order and the record indicates that the Court was simply removing from its docket a motion that would not be acted upon soon." (alteration and citation omitted)). But there is no reason to look beyond the text of an unambiguous court order. Put differently, when the plain language of a court order expressly denies injunctive relief, the text controls, and Carson imposes no additional requirements. See Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Walsh, 618 F.3d 218, 224 (2d Cir. 2010) ("Carson does not impose additional . . . requirement[s] for appellate jurisdiction over orders that explicitly . . . refuse . . . injunctions and thereby meet the plain terms of the statute.").
* * *
For these reasons, I disagree with the Majority Opinion's assessment that "there has been no ruling, explicitly or effectively, denying the injunction." Maj. Op. at 12. Both orders did so. Accordingly, I would find that we have appellate jurisdiction to evaluate both orders under § 1292(a)(1).

 

