, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I agree with the Majority Opinion's reversal of the District Court's order with respect to Lieutenant Reyne Kacsuta. I also agree with the jurisdictional dismissal of Officer Ryan Warnock's appeal because qualified immunity does not apply to state-law tort claims. But in two respects I part ways with the Majority's affirmance of the order denying qualified immunity to Officer Frank Welling at summary judgment. First, I do not believe that the Majority Opinion articulated the putative constitutional right at issue with the high level of specificity required for the qualified immunity analysis. Second, in my view, it is far from clearly established that Officer Welling's use of force against Will El — a graband- shove-to-secure, which resulted in a bruise on the hip — was unconstitutionally excessive. Thus, I respectfully dissent in part and would reverse the order denying qualified immunity to Officer Welling.
I. The Majority Opinion Does Not Define the Constitutional Right at Issue With the High Level of Specificity Required for the Qualified Immunity Analysis.
Because "qualified immunity protects 'all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law,'" Mullenix v. Luna, 136 S. Ct. 305, 308, 193 L. Ed. 2d 255 (2015) (citation omitted), the contours of the asserted constitutional right must be articulated with specificity. And if precedent does not make clear to "every reasonable officer" that certain conduct is unlawful in a particular circumstance, then an officer taking action in that situation is entitled to qualified immunity. District of Columbia v. Wesby, 138 S. Ct. 577, 590, 592, 199 L. Ed. 2d 453 (2018). Thus, defining the right at issue with specificity is critical for evaluating whether every reasonable officer would know that certain conduct is unlawful under the circumstances. Such specificity is "particularly important in excessive force cases." City of Escondido v. Emmons, 139 S. Ct. 500, 503, 202 L. Ed. 2d 455 (2019).
I do not believe that the Majority Opinion articulates the putative constitutional right with the requisite level of precision. The Majority describes the Fourth Amendment right in this way:
The right of an unarmed individual not to be taken to the ground during an investigatory stop when he stands up and takes one or two small steps towards a police officer who is standing a few feet away.
Maj. Op. at III.B.1 (alteration omitted); see also id. at III.B.2. But that articulation ignores important facts. It does not mention that Will El arose and extended an arm to point at an officer at close range. It also neglects that Officer Welling gestured for Will to sit down and that Will refused to. And Officer Welling did not initially take Will to the ground. Before the situation escalated, Welling grabbed and pushed Will back into a boarded-up window with Will maintaining his footing.
Each of those aspects of the incident can be seen from dashboard camera video, which provides a basis for reviewing an officer's use of force. See Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 378-81, 127 S. Ct. 1769, 167 L. Ed. 2d 686 (2007). During the detention, the El brothers, Will and Beyshaud, were seated on a step, curb-height elevated from the sidewalk, and while narrow in depth, the ledge spanned the frontage of an entrance to a boarded-up building. As they sat, the El brothers were facing the officers, and they had their backs to the building. At one point, Will complained to Officer Welling that the police were harassing him. After Officer Welling responded, Will stood up and extended his arm toward Officer Welling, who gestured for him to sit down. Ignoring that gesture, and instead of sitting down, Will turned away from Officer Welling and toward Lieutenant Kacsuta, shuffling his feet one or two times. At that moment, Welling grabbed Will by both the neck and wrist and pushed him so that his back was against the boarded-up window. One of Will's feet was on the ledge, and the other remained on the sidewalk.
The situation escalated from there. Beyshaud arose and attempted to punch Officer Welling. Officer Warnock then tasered Beyshaud. Then Welling took Will from leaning with his back against the boarded-up window to a face down position on the sidewalk for handcuffing. After the incident, Will had a bruise on his hip.
Will El's excessive force claim against Officer Welling relates only to Welling's initial use of force — the grab-and-shove against the boarded-up window. No one disputes that after Beyshaud arose and attempted to punch Officer Welling, Welling was justified in taking Will to a face down position on the sidewalk for handcuffing. See generally Appellees' Br. (repeatedly characterizing Officer Welling's use of excessive force as when he "grabbed Will El by the neck and slammed him into a wall").
Given these facts, I disagree with the Majority's definition of the right at issue. The inquiry into the putative right should be expressed this way:
Whether an unarmed individual who arises to his feet in close range to a police officer, points at an officer, and ignores a gesture to sit back down has a Fourth Amendment right not to be grabbed and shoved backward into a vertical structure while not losing his footing.
Such an articulation includes the three omitted events that would matter to every reasonable officer: that Will stood up and extended an arm to point at an officer at close range; that Will ignored Officer Welling's gesture to sit down; and that, as far as the complained of use of force, Welling did not tackle Will or take him to the ground. By excluding these important details, which are plainly evident from the video recording, the Majority Opinion does not identify the right with the "high 'degree of specificity'" required. Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590 (quoting Mullenix, 577 U.S. at 309) (emphasis added).1 
 II. Officer Welling's Conduct was not Clearly Established as an Unconstitutional Use of Excessive Force.
Under either formulation (the Majority's or mine), the constitutional right at issue was not clearly established. For a constitutional right to be 'clearly established,' the legal principle "must have a sufficiently clear foundation in then-existing precedent." Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 589. Such a foundation in precedent may rest on either "controlling authority" or "a robust consensus of cases of persuasive authority." Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, 563 U.S. 731, 741-42, 131 S. Ct. 2074, 179 L. Ed. 2d 1149 (2011) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 589-90; James v. N.J. State Police, 957 F.3d 165, 170 (3d Cir. 2020). The Majority Opinion does not identify any "factually analogous precedents of the Supreme Court [or] the Third Circuit." James, 957 F.3d at 170. Without controlling authority to meet the 'clearly established' threshold, the Majority relies instead on four decisions from other federal appellate courts as persuasive authority.2 
While the 'clearly established' standard does "not require a case directly on point," those four cases fall well short of "a robust consensus of persuasive authority." al-Kidd, 563 U.S. at 741-42 (internal quotation marks omitted). None of them involves a sufficiently analogous situation to this one to be "clear enough that every reasonable official would interpret [them] to establish the particular rule the plaintiff seeks to apply." Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590 (emphasis added). In Montoya, a woman resisted handcuffing, and one police officer grabbed her arm while another kicked her leg out from underneath her. See 669 F.3d at 869-70. That kick caused the woman to fall face first onto the ground and one officer to fall on top of her and break her leg. See id. But the actions of those officers and the degree of force that they used differ from this case: Will was pushed backwards while maintaining his footing, and he left with a bruised hip, not a broken leg. Deville involved a traffic stop and an individual who refused to get out of her vehicle. See 567 F.3d at 161. An officer grabbed and pulled the woman out of the car, pushed her against it, and handcuffed her resulting in a shoulder strain and lasting injury to her right elbow. See id. Will El was not in a vehicle, was not refusing to approach an officer, and did not leave with any lasting injury. Shreve involved the execution of an arrest warrant for a woman who refused to come out of her closet. See 453 F.3d at 683-86. There, after entering the house, an officer pepper sprayed the woman and jumped on her back with his knee while she was on the ground. See id. But this case does not involve a person hiding from police in her own home, pepper spray, or that level of force. In Thornton, as part of a civil property exchange, police officers charged into an apartment, threw a person to the floor, handcuffed him, and dragged him to the police vehicle. See 132 F.3d at 1398. Again, that is different than a grab-and-shove-to-secure during an investigatory stop on a sidewalk. If these out-of-circuit cases constitute a robust consensus that "squarely governs" this scenario, then we need a new level. Mullenix, 136 S. Ct. at 310.
In reaching this outcome, the Majority Opinion places unrealistic expectations on law enforcement officers. According to the Majority, Officer Welling was supposed to realize — in an instant, from four factually dissimilar out-of-circuit decisions — that a grab-and-shove-to-secure under these circumstances was clearly established as unconstitutional. Apparently, in that split-second, Officer Welling should have had recall of an Eighth Circuit case from 2012, a Fifth Circuit case from 2009, a Sixth Circuit case from 2006, and an Eleventh Circuit case from 1998 — all of which occurred in different contexts and involved much greater force than the grab-and-shove-to-secure at issue here. See Plumhoff v. Rickard, 572 U.S. 765, 780, 134 S. Ct. 2012, 188 L. Ed. 2d 1056 (2014) (rejecting that caselaw clearly established a right for a scenario in which "certain facts [were] more favorable to the officers"). Not only that, but Officer Welling — in the same moment — needed to determine whether those factually dissimilar, non-controlling cases represented a robust consensus of persuasive authority. Even if that were possible, that small handful of cases does not place Officer Welling's use of force "beyond debate," such that it was a clearly established Fourth Amendment violation. al-Kidd, 563 U.S. at 741; see also Brosseau v. Haugen, 543 U.S. 194, 200, 125 S. Ct. 596, 160 L. Ed. 2d 583 (2004) (concluding that a right was not clearly established when the only relevant authority consisted of "a handful of cases" from other circuits).
Make no mistake, the Majority imposes a heightened standard for qualified immunity so that it no longer protects '"all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law.'" Mullenix, 136 S. Ct. at 308 (citation omitted). Officers without the acumen to conduct a synapse-quick legal analysis of factually dissimilar, out-of-circuit precedent will be denied immunity and subject to suit for their actions. The Majority responds that it is not applying a heightened standard but rather the black-letter law of qualified immunity. Maj. Op. at n.7. But in articulating the doctrine, the Supreme Court has not imposed such a high standard on officers. See, e.g., Plumhoff, 572 U.S. at 778-80; Brosseau, 543 U.S. at 200. To the contrary, the Supreme Court has recognized that "it is sometimes difficult for an officer to determine how the relevant legal doctrine, here excessive force, will apply to the factual situation the officer confronts." Kisela v. Hughes, 138 S. Ct. 1148, 1152, 200 L. Ed. 2d 449 (2018) (internal quotation marks, alteration, and citation omitted).3  Rather than acknowledge that difficulty, or even that the appropriateness of Officer Welling's use of force is not "beyond debate," al-Kidd, 563 U.S. at 741, the Majority faults Officer Welling for failing to instantaneously distill a loose collage of out-of-circuit caselaw into a robust consensus of persuasive authority that would apply to the particular circumstances of his use of force — which was less than the amount of force used in any of those other cases.
To bolster its outcome, the Majority looks to borrow momentum from the factor-based tests of Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 109 S. Ct. 1865, 104 L. Ed. 2d 443 (1989), and Sharrar v. Felsing, 128 F.3d 810 (3d Cir. 1997). See Maj. Op. at III.B.2. But those factors, ten in total, do not make this an "obvious case" or otherwise clearly establish that Officer Welling's use of force was unconstitutional. Brosseau, 543 U.S. at 199 (recognizing that the Graham factors may serve as a basis for a clearly established right in an "obvious case"); see also James, 957 F.3d at 169.
The Graham factors do not render Officer Welling's use of force excessive. As to the first factor — the severity of the offense — the Majority concludes that the offense for which the El brothers were detained (the underage purchase of tobacco) was not severe. But this factor does not merit much, if any, weight in the context of an officer, like Officer Welling, who did not initiate the detention and who responded to a call for backup. The Majority also concludes that the second and third factors — the immediacy of the safety threat and efforts to resist or evade arrest — were not met. But Will El arose and disregarded a gesture to sit down. Do not standing suspects pose more of a safety and flight risk than seated suspects? From the "peace of a judge's chambers," Graham, 490 U.S. at 396 (quotation omitted), that difference may seem small, but on the street, when a suspect increases the threat and flight level, it is too much to read the Constitution as prohibiting altogether the use of force.
I find the Majority's analysis of the Sharrar factors similarly unconvincing. As to the first factor, the Majority concludes that the Els were not violent or dangerous, see Maj. Op. at III.B.2, but in a flash Beyshaud arose and attempted to punch Officer Welling. Nor did Welling have the duration of the detention to contemplate his use of force — as the Majority suggests. See Maj. Op. at n.6. Rather, Officer Welling had to make a split-second decision on his use of force: he had an opportunity to secure Will after Will arose, disregarded a gesture to sit down, and looked away. See id. at I.A. ("The events that happened [surrounding Welling's use of force] cascaded quickly and were over in about ten seconds."). The Majority also counts the outnumbering of officers to detainees as six to two. But that statistic alone does not provide an accurate description. Only three of those officers were on the sidewalk next to the El brothers, and one of those three, Lieutenant Kacsuta, who was the object of Will El's attention at the moment of Officer Welling's use of force, is smaller in stature than the El brothers. Finally, it should not be minimized that Will's reported injury — a bruise on the hip — is minor.
Under the Graham / Sharrar factors, this is not an "obvious case" of excessive force. Brosseau, 543 U.S. at 199. Instead, these factors generate uncertainty, and that further undermines the Majority's conclusion that Officer Welling violated a clearly established constitutional right.
* * *
In sum, I concur in part and respectfully dissent in part. As I understand the law, qualified immunity shields Officer Welling from suit because at the time of the incident, it was not clearly established that a grab-and-shove-to-secure, which resulted in a bruise on the hip, constituted excessive force in violation of the Fourth Amendment. Given the caselaw at the time, these events occurred in the "hazy border between excessive and acceptable force" in which law enforcement officers are entitled to qualified immunity. Mullenix, 136 S. Ct. at 312 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).

 

