, dissenting.
This case hinges on a question of state substantive law: whether a promise to pay for estimated quantities of required materials is enforceable. In interpreting New Jersey law,1  the Majority Opinion holds that such a promise does not suffice to form a requirements contract. Instead, the Majority Opinion conditions the enforceability of a requirements contract on an express promise to purchase - not merely to pay for - requirements. I disagree and believe that when a promise to pay for requirements is accompanied by estimated quantities of required materials, New Jersey law recognizes the formation of a binding requirements contract.
Here, several New Jersey counties and municipalities, as members of a cooperative pricing council, solicited bids to supply their annual rock salt needs, and they provided estimates of their annual rock salt requirements. Mid-American Salt LLC submitted a bid, and the council awarded a contract to Mid-American. Through that contract, which incorporated the council members' estimates of their rock salt requirements, Mid-American promised to furnish the council members with their rock salt requirements, and the council members promised to pay for quantities required.
The Majority Opinion views the council members' promise to pay for rock salt as imposing no obligation on them to purchase their required rock salt from Mid-American. But as I see it, the council members' good faith estimates of their rock salt needs, coupled with their promise to pay for quantities required, obligated them to purchase rock salt from Mid-American in quantities reasonably proportionate to the estimates. Because the council members did not do so, I would reverse the District Court's judgment dismissing Mid-American's three-count complaint against the council and its members.
 I. Under New Jersey Law, a Promise to Pay for Estimated Quantities of Required Materials Is Enforceable.
Not all promises are enforceable. See E. Allan Farnsworth, Contracts 12 (2d ed.  1990) ("No legal system has even been reckless enough to make all promises enforceable."). For a promise to be enforceable, there must be consideration. See Martindale v. Sandvik, Inc., 173 N.J. 76, 800 A.2d 872, 878 (N.J. 2002) ("Basic contract principles render a promise enforceable against the promisor if the promisee gave some consideration for the promise.").2  In relying on the Restatement (Second) of Contracts, the New Jersey Supreme Court has defined consideration as having a procedural component (bargaining) and a substantive component (an act, forbearance, or other alteration of a legal relationship):
The essential requirement of consideration is a bargained-for exchange of promises or performance that may consist of an act, a forbearance, or the creation, modification, or destruction of a legal relation. If the consideration requirement is met, there is no additional requirement of gain or benefit to the promisor, loss or detriment to the promisee, equivalence in the values exchanged, or mutuality of obligation.
Shebar, 544 A.2d at 383 (citations omitted); see also Martindale, 800 A.2d at 878; Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 71 (October 2019 update).
The adequacy of consideration poses a question of some depth in the context of a requirements contract. Such a contract traditionally involves a promise to purchase all specified goods or services required for a certain period at a certain price.3  Although such contracts are unquestionably bargained for, the issue is whether that promise is substantive or illusory.4  As this Circuit once observed about requirements contracts, albeit in the context of Pennsylvania law, without a duty of good faith, the buyer's promise is generally illusory because "the buyer in a requirements contract has no duty to have any requirements." Fort Wayne Corrugated Paper Co. v. Anchor Hocking Glass Corp., 130 F.2d 471, 473 (3d Cir. 1942).
At common law, New Jersey was similarly hesitant to recognize the enforceability of requirements contracts due to concerns about the absence of adequate consideration. Most notably, the New Jersey Supreme Court in G. Loewus & Co. v. Vischia, 2 N.J. 54, 65 A.2d 604 (N.J. 1949), held that a requirements contract that lacked "a reasonably accurate estimate" of the supplies needed was not enforceable. Id. at 606. There, a wine distributor agreed with a winery "to place orders . . . from time to time for such wine as it may require under labels bearing brand or trade names which are its exclusive property." Id. at 604-05 (emphasis added). Without an estimated-quantity provision, the New Jersey Supreme Court held that the winery's promise to place orders for required quantities did not constitute adequate consideration because it was "left to depend for its very existence upon its future election." Id. at 606.
 Subsequently, in 1961, New Jersey adopted a modified version of the Uniform Commercial Code, which refined the consideration needed for requirements contracts. See N.J. Stat. Ann. § 12A:2-306(1). Under the now-governing statutory provision, the enforceability of a requirements contract rests on a duty of good faith:
A term which measures the quantity by ... the requirements of the buyer means such actual . . . requirements as may occur in good faith, except that no quantity unreasonably disproportionate to any stated estimate or in the absence of a stated estimate to any normal or otherwise comparable prior ... requirements may be tendered or demanded.
Id. (emphasis added); see also id. § 12A:1-201(b)(20) (defining "good faith" generally as meaning "honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing"); Sons of Thunder, Inc. v. Borden, Inc., 148 N.J. 396, 690 A.2d 575, 587 (N.J. 1997) ("[E]very contract in New Jersey contains an implied covenant of good faith and faith dealing.").
Under that formulation, the duty of good faith acts as a ballast to steady an otherwise uncertain promise so that a requirements contract does not lack adequate consideration.5  As explained by the official statutory comments, which carry persuasive force under New Jersey law,6  a requirements contract is enforceable because "the party who will determine quantity is required to operate his plant or conduct his business in good faith and according to commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade so that his . . . requirements will approximate a reasonably foreseeable figure." See N.J. Stat. Ann. § 12A:2-306 cmt. 2. Thus, due to the implicit duty of good faith, requirements contracts are enforceable in New Jersey.
But nothing about New Jersey's statutory formulation suggests that the identification of estimated quantities of required materials has gone from the missing ingredient for adequate consideration, see G. Loewus, 65 A.2d at 606, to illusions. To the contrary, estimated quantities of required materials enhance the adequacy of consideration consistent with the duty of good faith because those estimates serve as benchmarks for assessing breach: "the agreed estimate is to be regarded as a center around which the parties intend the variation to occur." N.J. Stat. Ann. § 12A:2-306 cmt. 3; see generally Melvin Aron Eisenberg, The Principles of Consideration, 67 Cornell L. Rev. 640, 640 (1982) (positing that "theories of enforceability must focus heavily on appropriate measures of damages").
Although sparse, subsequent New Jersey judicial and administrative decisions do not diminish the significance of estimated quantities in requirements contracts. The most recent and on-point case, an unreported decision from the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court, held that a requirements contract containing estimated quantities was enforceable. See Tilcon N.Y., Inc. v. Morris Cty. Coop. Pricing Council, 2014 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 449, 2014 WL 839122 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. Mar. 5, 2014). In construing that contract for estimated quantities of asphalt, that decision held that "implicit in [the] submission of estimates was a promise to purchase amounts  approximately equal to those estimates." 2014 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 449, [WL] at *27.
Even decisions finding promises unenforceable do not negate the importance of estimated quantities. In one case, the parties agreed to price terms for the delivery of concrete for a specific construction project. See Loizeaux Builders Supply Co. v. Donald B. Ludwig Co., 144 N.J. Super. 556, 366 A.2d 721, 723 (N.J. Super. Ct. Law Div. 1976). But the purchaser did not identify estimated quantities of concrete. See id. at 723-24. Nor did the purchaser promise to buy the concrete required for the job. See id. at 723. In holding that such an arrangement was not a binding contract, the Superior Court did not touch upon, much less disturb, the principle that estimated quantities add dimension to otherwise uncertain promises for requirements.
The unreported administrative ruling cited by the Majority Opinion does not call into doubt that principle. See Bd. of Educ. of the Twp. of Sparta, Sussex, Cty., v. Bd. of Educ. of the Twp. of Byram, Sussex Cty., 2011 WL 1843970 (N.J. Admin. May 13, 2011). That decision refused to enforce a joint purchasing agreement between school districts for fuel oil. Id. at *3, 20. But the primary reasons for that outcome had nothing to do with estimated quantities of required fuel oil. See id. at *18. Rather, the contract was unenforceable because the lead contracting agency "failed to create and register a cooperative purchasing system," and that agency "did not prepare and enter into a written joint purchasing agreement . . . in accordance with the statutory and regulatory requirements." Id. As a tertiary rationale, the administrative ruling relied on the correspondence between the parties that did not identify required quantities of fuel oil but instead listed only the "size and number of [the] fuel oil tanks." Id. at *19. The identification of nothing more than storage capacity differs significantly from a specific estimate of annual quantities of required materials.
From these authorities, I interpret New Jersey law as allowing parties to form an enforceable requirements contract through an identification of estimated quantities of required materials, together with promises to furnish and pay for requirements.
 II. The Council Members' Promise to Pay for Estimated Quantities of Required Rock Salt Is Enforceable.
The members of the cooperative pricing council entered a binding contract for their rock salt requirements. As part of their bid specifications, the council members provided estimated quantities of "Bulk Rock Salt, Delivered by Truck, Unloaded by Bidder." Bid Specifications at 3, 9-13 (JA282, 288-92); see also Notification of Award at 2 (JA414).7  For purposes of awarding the contract on a county-by-county basis, those estimated quantities were aggregated into bid proposals at the county level, to achieve lower prices through a volume discount.8  From those estimates, Mid-American  submitted a qualifying bid, and the council awarded it a contract to deliver bulk rock salt to council members within five counties. The contract memorialized Mid-American's promises to furnish the required materials as estimated by the council members' bid proposals:
[Mid-American] will furnish said material required as stated in the bid proposal at anytime during the term of the Contract.
Contract #3: Rock Salt & Liquid Calcium Chloride ¶ 3 (JA407) (emphasis added). In return, the council members agreed to pay for the rock salt provided by Mid-American in fulfillment of those requirements:
[Council members] agree to pay [Mid-American] for said work and/or materials when completed or delivered, as the case may be . . . for quantities required, at the respective unit prices bid therefore by [Mid-American].
Id. ¶ 5 (JA 408) (emphasis added).
But after that award, council members in those counties bought either no rock salt from Mid-American or amounts dramatically less than the quantities estimated. Collectively, the council members in those counties purchased less than 5% of the estimated combined total of bulk rock salt from Mid-American.
On these allegations, Mid-American's complaint should not have been dismissed. Mid-American plausibly alleges adequate consideration - a bargained-for exchange of enforceable promises. The parties bargained for the rock salt contract through a formal process. The council members published a bid package, which included a notice to bidders, an invitation to bid, bid specifications, and bid proposals containing estimated quantities of rock salt. Mid-American submitted a bid, and the council issued a formal notice of award to Mid-American. Then Mid-American and the council signed a contract for rock salt. That contract incorporated the council members' estimates and contained Mid-American's promise to furnish the council members' rock salt requirements, which they would request through purchase orders. Finally, and most relevant here, the contract included the council members' promise to pay for the rock salt they received from Mid-American. In this context, in which council members submitted estimated quantities of their annual rock salt needs and Mid-American promised to meet those needs, the council members' promise to pay for the rock salt furnished by Mid-American should be enforceable.
Thus, unlike the Majority Opinion, I understand the parties to have formed a binding requirements contract. That agreement obligated council members, consistent with the duty of good faith, to purchase quantities of rock salt reasonably proportionate to their estimates. Because they did not, Mid-American should have been permitted to proceed with its three-count complaint and pursue, among other things, damages for purchase amounts that were "unreasonably disproportionate" to the council members' estimates. N.J. Stat. Ann. § 12A:2-306(1).
 III. No Other Provisions of the Contract Render It Unenforceable.
In reaching a different conclusion, the Majority Opinion relies primarily on the absence of express promise by the council members to purchase their required rock salt from Mid-American. Maj. Op. at 19. The Majority Opinion also relies on two components of the council members' bid specifications: the no-minimum-order clause and the quantity-variation provisions. I see it differently.
  A. The Promise to Pay for Requirements, When Accompanied by Estimated Quantities, Is Enforceable.
The Majority Opinion refuses to enforce this contract because it "does not contain a promise to purchase requirements." Maj. Op. at 19. That is the nub of our disagreement. The Majority Opinion insists that a requirements contract must contain an express promise to purchase requirements. But as I understand New Jersey law, due to the centrality of the duty of good faith, a promise to pay for requirements becomes enforceable when it is accompanied by estimated quantities of required materials. See G. Loewus, 65 A.2d at 606; Tilcon, 2014 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 449, 2014 WL 839122, at *27. Both a promise to pay for requirements and an identification of estimated quantities are present here. See Contract #3: Rock Salt & Liquid Calcium Chloride ¶¶ 3, 5 (JA407-08). And because that promise resulted from a bargaining process in which Mid-American promised to furnish requirements, I believe that the parties entered an enforceable requirements contract.
Nor is the disjunctive 'or' in the pay-for clause fatal to enforceability. Cf. Maj. Op. at 20. The options in that clause relate to different methods for calculating payment amount. If the contract specifies the quantity supplied, then the payment amount will be "in accordance with the said specification and the Contractor's proposal." Contract #3: Rock Salt & Liquid Calcium Chloride ¶ 5 (JA408). But if the contract is for requirements, then the payment amount will be determined by "unit bid prices." Id. Tellingly, the contract with Mid-American uses exclusively unit pricing - in further confirmation that it is a requirements contract. See Notice of Award at 2 (JA414) (specifying unit prices for Category I Bulk Rock Salt). But especially under New Jersey's presumption in favor of contract formation,9  any perceived ambiguity in this clause should not obliterate the enforceability of this bargained-for agreement.
 B. The No-Minimum-Order Clause Does Not Negate Consideration.
The contract does not contain a specific delivery schedule for rock salt, but that does not destroy its enforceability. Instead of a delivery schedule, the contract sets forth a process for buying rock salt through individual purchase orders. See Contract #3: Rock Salt & Liquid Calcium Chloride ¶ 3 (JA407) ("Members of the MCCPC may purchase items pursuant to the Contract by issuance of purchase orders."). Submission of a purchase order imposes certain obligations on Mid-American, such as delivery location10  and delivery time,11  as well as consequences for failing to make the delivery as specified.12 
 The no-minimum-order clause is a critical feature of the purchase-order process. That clause generally prohibits Mid-American from imposing a minimum order requirement on council members: "No minimum order requirements are allowed, unless stated otherwise elsewhere." Bid Specifications at 1 (JA280). Through that provision, the members of the cooperative pricing council have flexibility to submit individual purchase orders in any amount (unless otherwise specified), but the clause does not release them from their estimated annual totals.
The operation of this clause can be explained through example. Suppose, for instance, that a council member estimated a delivery amount of 100 tons of rock salt for the year. Through the no-minimum order clause, unless the contract provided otherwise, that member could reach that total through five deliveries of twenty tons, ten deliveries of ten tons, a hundred deliveries of one ton, or any other combination. But that flexibility for each individual order would not absolve a council member of its obligation to purchase an estimated annual total of 100 tons of rock salt.
The Majority Opinion interprets the no-minimum-order clause to mean that the council members do not need to make any purchases throughout the year. See Maj. Op. at 18 (interpreting the non-minimum-order clause as "reliev[ing] a member with no salt needs of any obligation to purchase"). But the no-minimum-order clause and the promise to purchase estimated annual quantities are separate terms. I therefore disagree with the Majority Opinion and point out two additional concerns.
In my view, the Majority Opinion places undue significance on the no-minimum-order clause - so much so that the clause would overtake promises to purchase fixed quantities of rock salt. Suppose the same agreement except that the council members agreed to purchase exact quantities of rock salt. Would the no-minimum-order clause also render that agreement illusory? No, it would not. The process for submitting individual purchase orders is distinct from an obligation to purchase annual quantities. Yet under the Majority Opinion, a no-minimum-order clause, even in a contract specifying fixed annual quantities, would render the contract unenforceable. I find no support in New Jersey law for that unsettling proposition.
I also do not see the Majority Opinion as accounting for the contract's specified exception to the no-minimum-order clause. Mid-American cannot impose minimum order requirements "unless stated otherwise elsewhere." Bid Specifications at 1 (JA280). But this contract stated - through the council members' own bid specifications - that the minimum order for delivered bulk rock salt was 25 tons.13  If nothing else, under the Majority Opinion's  reasoning, that 25-ton minimum order amount should be enforceable.
For these reasons, I disagree with the Majority Opinion's reading of the no-minimum-order clause.
 C. The Quantity-Variation Provisions Do Not Undermine Consideration.
In holding that the council members' promise is illusory, the Majority Opinion relies heavily on the contract's quantity-variation provisions. Those all reinforce the same principle, i.e., that the annual required quantities are estimates:
• This is an Open-Ended contract, meaning all items are specified with an estimated quantity.
• There is no obligation to purchase that quantity during the contract period, and the actual quantity purchased by members of the MCCPC may vary.
• All quantities may be more or less than estimated.
Bid Specifications at 1 (JA280) (emphasis added). And as I understand New Jersey law, the presence of estimated quantities does not weaken but instead enhances the enforceability of a requirements contract. See G. Loewus, 65 A.2d at 606; Tilcon, 2014 N.J. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 449, 2014 WL 839122, at *27.
The first quantity-variation term, the open-ended provision, does not undermine enforceability. If promises for open-ended required quantities were fatal to enforceability, then all requirements contracts would be illusory. See generally 2 Corbin on Contracts § 6.5 ("In a requirements contract, the quantity term is not fixed at the time of contracting."). But that is not the rule in New Jersey, where an open-ended promise for requirements, coupled with the duty of good faith, see N.J. Stat. Ann. § 12A:2-306(1), or even with "a reasonably accurate estimate" of the quantity to be purchased, G. Loewus, 65 A.2d at 606, may constitute adequate consideration.
The next provision - which underscores that council members need not purchase the quantities estimated - similarly does not reflect a phantom promise as the Majority Opinion suggests. See Maj. Op. at 18-19 (characterizing "the Council members' promise" as a promise "to buy salt in such quantities 'as may be desired' or as they 'may want'").14  That clause makes clear that the estimated quantities are just that: estimates, as opposed to fixed, certain amounts. If anything, this clause's reference to "actual quantity purchased," evidences the understanding that council members would purchase some actual quantity of rock salt. Certainly, a promise to purchase actual quantities is not an illusion.
The same holds true for the final quantity-variation provision that "[a]ll quantities may be more or less than estimated." Particularly in light of the duty of good faith, that clause presupposes the purchase of some non-zero quantity of rock salt. And if the promise were merely an illusion, then that clause would have stated that 'there is no obligation to make any purchase' - not that "all quantities" purchased may vary.
* * *
 Under New Jersey substantive law, a promise to pay for an estimated quantity of a required materials is enforceable. The contract at issue contained such a promise, and thus Mid-American's lawsuit should not have been dismissed.15 

 

