, dissenting in part and concurring in part.
I write to dissent from the majority's decision to grant, in part, Bautista's petition for review. I believe the majority, in reaching that conclusion, incorrectly characterizes Dr. Barnes's declaration and the BIA's consideration of it. Having accurately (albeit tersely) summarized Dr. Barnes's declaration, the BIA appropriately concluded that Bautista did not demonstrate changed country conditions because the "evidence [he provided] indicates ongoing discrimination against ... HIV positive individuals in Mexico, not that conditions in Mexico have worsened in this respect since [Bautista's] hearing in 2009," and thus Bautista could have presented evidence of such discrimination at his initial removal proceedings. This correct summary of the evidence that Bautista provided to the BIA was not an abuse of discretion. We should deny Bautista's petition for review in whole.
1. In assessing the presence of changed country conditions for purposes of a motion to reopen, "[t]he critical question is ... whether circumstances have changed sufficiently that a petitioner who previously did not have a legitimate claim for asylum now has a well-founded fear of future persecution." Malty v. Ashcroft, 381 F.3d 942, 945 (9th Cir. 2004). Here, that means Bautista was required to provide evidence comparing the conditions in Mexico in 2009 at the time of Bautista's initial hearing before the IJ with those in 2018 at the time he filed a motion to reopen. See Salim v. Lynch, 831 F.3d 1133, 1137 (9th Cir. 2016).
2. As the basis for its grant of Bautista's petition, the majority references Dr. Barnes's declaration's statement that "'the situation of LGBT and HIV+ individuals [in Mexico] has ... become more perilous' ...." The majority characterizes Dr. Barnes's declaration as evincing that there has been "an increase in violence against LGBTQ persons following the passage of progressive social policies in 2010 and 2015." But that is not actually what Dr. Barnes's declaration shows. It references "a number of progressive legal policy advances toward LGBT rights" in Mexico, including some since 2009: "same sex marriage and adoption laws passed in Mexico City in 2010 and the Mexico City Supreme Court rul[ing that] laws preventing gay marriage were unconstitutional in 2015."1  It also refers to what it calls the "well documented ... 'Backlash theory,'" which it says supports a conclusion that "the situation of LBGT [sic] and HIV+ individuals has paradoxically become more perilous, as the public and authorities react to (backlash) expressions of a form of sexuality that the culture does not embrace and, in fact, fears."
But Dr. Barnes's declaration never expressly ties its Mexico "backlash theory" to the time frame since Bautista's initial hearing in 2009. Instead, her declaration merely opines that conditions have worsened since some unidentified time in the past. So the BIA's statement is correct that Dr. Barnes's declaration only "indicates ongoing discrimination against ... HIV positive individuals in Mexico, not that conditions in Mexico have worsened in this respect since [Bautista's] hearing in 2009."
In explaining her Mexico "backlash theory," Dr. Barnes imprecisely opines that the situation for the LGBTQ and HIV-positive community "has paradoxically become increasingly more perilous" and violence against such community "has increased over time," without detailing when these increases began or what time periods are being compared. One cause of such backlash, according to Dr. Barnes, is "advances in legislation and increasing visibility of gay rights and AIDS activism." Notably, Dr. Barnes does not specifically identify the 2010 or 2015 policy advances referenced by the majority as the starting point for her Mexico "backlash theory." As explained below, there is a good reason for this—Dr. Barnes has previously opined that the "backlash" has been occurring in Mexico since well before 2009. It is therefore reasonable to view any post-2009 policy advances as merely the latest stimulus for an ongoing backlash. This reading of Dr. Barnes's declaration is particularly justified by the fact that she also cites to a source from 2006—well before Bautista's initial hearing in 2009—to describe persecution and violence against LGBTQ and HIV-positive individuals. And throughout her declaration, she acknowledges that the conditions she is describing are "ongoing," "constant," "continu[ing]," "pervasive," "still prevalent," "persistent and consistent."
The BIA was not required to ignore the facts in Dr. Barnes's declaration evincing that the Mexico "backlash theory" has been ongoing since before 2009. Cf. Bhasin v. Gonzales, 423 F.3d 977, 987 (9th Cir. 2005). Taken at face value, Dr. Barnes's declaration shows that conditions for those perceived to be LGBTQ in Mexico were worse in 2018 than they were at some indiscriminate time in the past, but not that conditions were necessarily worse in 2018 than they were in 2009. Conditions in Mexico have, therefore, not changed for the worse since Bautista's initial hearing before the IJ—at least not based on Dr. Barnes's declaration.
Instead of disregarding evidence of changed country conditions in Dr. Barnes's declaration—as the majority accuses the BIA of doing—the BIA specifically referenced Dr. Barnes's declaration, but concluded that the evidence as a whole showed ongoing discrimination against HIV-positive individuals, not a change in those conditions since 2009. This conclusion is just a succinct way of saying what I have explained in more detail above, and does not come close to rising to the level of abuse of discretion.
3. This Court's previous exposure to Dr. Barnes's Mexico "backlash theory" only reinforces my conclusion above that the BIA's reading of Dr. Barnes's declaration was not an abuse of discretion. Dr. Barnes has been championing the exact same Mexico "backlash theory" for years, including before this Court and for the period well before Bautista's 2009 hearing. For example, in her declaration submitted in the matter of Avendano-Hernandez v. Lynch, Dr. Barnes asserted that "as a result of [the "gay pride"] movement, the[] situation [of LGBTQ individuals in Mexico] has paradoxically become increasingly more perilous, as the public and authorities react to their expressions of a form of sexuality that the culture does not embrace and, in fact, fears." Certified Admin. Record at 419, 800 F.3d 1072 (9th Cir. 2015) (No. 13-73744). This assertion is basically identical to Dr. Barnes's statement in the case before us, except, in support of her assertion in Avendano-Hernandez, Dr. Barnes described a newspaper article reporting "a 100% increase in the average number of annual killings [in Mexico] motivated by homophobia during the period between 2001 and 2009, as compared with from [sic] 1995 through 2000." Id. This data—relied on by Dr. Barnes to reach the same conclusion she reaches in this case—clearly came from the same time frame as (if not well before) Bautista's initial hearing. While Dr. Barnes notably left out the discussion of this newspaper article from her declaration submitted in this case, she curiously did not provide any new or updated details or statistics in its place to indicate that conditions have gotten even worse since 2009.
This Court en banc also identified the same "backlash" conditions occurring in Mexico around the time of Bautista's initial hearing. See Bringas-Rodriguez v. Sessions, 850 F.3d 1051, 1057 (9th Cir. 2017) (en banc) (noting appellant "submitted 2009 and 2010 U.S. Department of State Country Reports for Mexico ... [which] showed that the violence [against gays and lesbians] rose even as—and perhaps because—Mexican laws were becoming increasingly tolerant of gay rights").2  The Court highlighted that "[t]he 2009 and 2010 [country] reports show ... that persecution of gay men remained a serious problem in Mexico five and six years after [appellant] fled in 2004." Id. at 1075 (emphasis added). As the basis for this proposition, the Court quoted from Mexico's 2009 country report, noting "[w]hile homosexual conduct experienced growing social acceptance, the National Center to Prevent and Control HIV/AIDS stated that discrimination persisted." Id. (emphasis added). Significantly, the 2006 and 2007 country reports for Mexico include nearly identical observations.3  These statements from Bringas-Rodriguez further support that the conditions described in Dr. Barnes's "backlash theory" have been prevalent in Mexico since before Bautista's initial hearing.
Given all of this, the BIA did not abuse its discretion in its short but fair assessment of Dr. Barnes's declaration and its resulting decision to deny Bautista's motion to reopen.4  Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from the majority's decision to grant, in part, Bautista's petition for review.5 

 

