
No Shepard’s  Signal™As of: September 19, 2020 8:56 PM Z
Andres v. United States AG
United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
September 9, 2020, Filed
No. 20-12864-H

Reporter
2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 28540 *
 REYNA NICOLAS ANDRES, S. N., G. N., Petitioners, versus U.S. ATTORNEY GENERAL, Respondent.  
Prior History:  [*1] Petition for Review of a Decision of the Board of Immigration Appeals.
  
Counsel: For Reyna Nicolas Andres, S. N., G. N., Petitioners: Gisela Rodriguez, Law Office of Gisela Rodriguez, LLC, Tallahassee, FL. 
For U.S. Attorney General, Respondent: Michele Yvette Frances Sarko, Oil, U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC; Nicole Guzman, DHS, Office of Chief Counsel, Orlando, FL.  
Judges: BEFORE: MARTIN, NEWSOM, and GRANT, Circuit Judges. MARTIN, Circuit Judge, concurring. NEWSOM, Circuit Judge, dissenting.  
Opinion




BY THE COURT:
Petitioners' motion for a stay of removal is GRANTED.
Concur by: MARTIN  
Concur




MARTIN, Circuit Judge, concurring:
I agree with the decision to grant Ms. Andres's motion for a stay of removal. Reyna Nicholas Andres and her two minor children seek an emergency stay of removal pending the disposition of their Petition for Review. Ms. Andres, the lead petitioner, is an indigenous rights activist who came to the United States after being targeted for violent reprisal by allies of hydroelectric and mining companies in her home country of Guatemala. She arrived in the United States with her two minor children and has since given birth to her third child, a U.S. citizen. I think Ms. Andres has demonstrated a strong likelihood [*2]  of success on the merits of her appeal and is likely to be irreparably injured absent a stay. See Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434, 129 S. Ct. 1749, 1761, 173 L. Ed. 2d 550 (2009).
 I.
Ms. Andres is a Guatemalan national who speaks the Konjobal language, which she described as one of the indigenous languages of the Mayan people. In Guatemala she lived in a small indigenous village where her family worked in subsistence agriculture. She was elected treasurer of an organization called "COCODE," a community development council that works to resist development and mining in the area around her village.
In 2013, Ms. Andres's cousin's husband, another spokesperson for indigenous rights, was killed in retaliation for his opposition to the hydroelectric development. Though this event frightened Ms. Andres, she remained in Guatemala.
In 2015, Ms. Andres and other members of the COCODE attended a public hearing in support of three men who had been detained at a hydroelectric dam. Approximately 300 people attended the hearing in support of the detained men. After the men were released, at around 4:00 a.m., a group of people who supported the mayor and hydroelectric companies surrounded Ms. Andres's group and began to shoot into the crowd. Ms. Andres and others were then chased [*3]  into the surrounding woods by supporters of the mayor who were wielding machetes and pieces of wood. Ms. Andres was not injured, but her husband's cousin was shot during the violence. He later died of his wounds. Other women in the group were attacked, had their clothes ripped off, and were beaten.
After escaping, Ms. Andres hid at her sister's home. She remained in hiding at her parents' and sister's homes for the next ten months, until she departed Guatemala. During her ten months in hiding she received threats and "could not go out safely."
Ms. Andres and her two sons arrived in the United States in October 2015. Lacking valid visas or other entry documents, they conceded inadmissibility but applied for asylum and withholding of removal. At the asylum hearing, Ms. Andres testified to the above facts before an Immigration Judge ("IJ"), who found her testimony credible.
Ms. Andres submitted documentary evidence, including news articles, supporting her claims. Ms. Andres's brother, Simon Nicholas Andres, also testified. Mr. Andres is the president of COCODE. He testified that Ms. Andres was persecuted for opposing hydroelectric company owners and attempting to protect her people's land. [*4]  He said the conflict between indigenous peoples and the hydroelectric and mining companies is ongoing and that the police side with the companies, not the indigenous peoples. He said that Ms. Andres's family continues to receive threats from hydroelectric companies, their supporters, and their employees. And he testified that he has personally been threatened by a hydroelectric company employee, who brandished a gun and threatened to kill him, and believes that if Ms. Andres returned to Guatemala she would be harmed or killed.
The IJ denied Ms. Andres's applications for asylum and withholding of removal. The IJ held that Ms. Andres failed to establish past persecution because there was no evidence indicating that the emotional trauma she endured as a result of being shot at and chased "rose to the level of permanent psychological harm or . . . affected her ability to continue to conduct her affairs either as a mother, wife, et cetera." The IJ also found that Ms. Andres failed to establish a well-founded fear of future persecution if she were returned to Guatemala.
Ms. Andres appealed to the BIA. In addition to challenging the denial of her applications for asylum and withholding, she [*5]  also argued that the IJ violated her due process rights by not allowing an expert witness to testify about "land rights, the political atmosphere of [her village], and the region with the foreign hydroelectric companies." The BIA adopted and affirmed the denial of her applications for asylum and withholding. It also rejected her due process arguments, holding that "none of the expert's testimony would have impacted the Immigration Judge's determinations that her past mistreatment did not constitute persecution and that she failed to establish an objective basis for a well-founded fear of future persecution in Guatemala."
Ms. Andres timely filed a petition for review of the BIA's decision.
 II.
We review the decisions of the BIA and the IJ to the extent that the BIA expressly adopted the opinion of the IJ. Kazemzadeh v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 577 F.3d 1341, 1350 (11th Cir. 2009). We review de novo the application of legal standards to factual determinations. See United States v. Williams, 340 F.3d 1231, 1237 (11th Cir. 2003).
 III.
A petitioner seeking a stay of removal pending appeal must satisfy four factors: that (1) she is likely to succeed on the merits; (2) she will be irreparably injured absent a stay; (3) a stay will not substantially injure the other parties interested in the proceeding; and (4) the public interest [*6]  favors a stay. See Nken, 556 U.S. at 434, 129 S. Ct. at 1761. In my view, Ms. Andres has satisfied each of these factors.
A.
I think Ms. Andres is likely to prevail on her arguments that the agency erred in holding she failed to show past persecution and that the agency violated her due process rights by not allowing her to call an expert witness to testify about current conditions in Guatemala. I will address these arguments in turn.
1. Past persecution
I think the BIA erred in adopting the IJ's holding that Ms. Andres's treatment did not amount to past persecution. A noncitizen seeking to establish eligibility for asylum based on past persecution must prove (1) that she was persecuted and (2) that the persecution was on account of a protected ground. 8 C.F.R. § 208.13(b)(1); De Santamaria v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 525 F.3d 999, 1007 (11th Cir. 2008). Persecution is "an extreme concept" that requires more than "verbal harassment or intimidation." Diallo v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 596 F.3d 1329, 1333 (11th Cir. 2010) (per curiam) (quotation marks omitted). "In determining whether an alien has suffered past persecution, the IJ must consider the cumulative effect of the allegedly persecutory incidents." De Santamaria, 525 F.3d at 1008.
Here, the IJ held that Ms. Andres failed to establish past persecution based only on the finding that she did not show that she suffered permanent psychological harm as the result of being shot [*7]  at, chased with machetes, and threatened. This is directly at odds with our Circuit's longstanding precedent that being shot at and threatened is sufficient to establish past persecution.
In Sanchez Jimenez v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 492 F.3d 1223 (11th Cir. 2007), we held "being shot at in a moving car multiple times by two armed men" was sufficiently "extreme" to qualify as past persecution. Id. at 1233. The panel reasoned that, in light of the Supreme Court's holding that an applicant may establish a well-founded fear of future persecution by showing "a 10% chance of being shot," id. at 1234 (emphasis omitted) (quoting INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 440, 107 S. Ct. 1207, 1217, 94 L. Ed. 2d 434 (1987)), "then an applicant's credible testimony that he was intentionally and repeatedly fired upon surely constitutes past persecution." Id. Similarly, we have held the cumulative effect of death threats and physical assault, which would not amount to persecution alone, is sufficient to establish past persecution. See De Santamaria, 525 F.3d at 1003-1004, 1009 (holding petitioner established past persecution based on "repeated threats combined with other forms of severe mistreatment," even where no serious physical injury resulted); Mejia v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 498 F.3d 1253, 1257-58 (11th Cir. 2007) (holding that past persecution was established cumulatively through evidence that petitioner received death threats, had a rock thrown at him, and had his nose broken with the [*8]  butt of a gun).
I see little difference between Ms. Andres's claim and these similar cases in which we have found past persecution. Ms. Andres submitted evidence and credible testimony that indigenous activists like her have been murdered and threatened by supporters of mining and hydroelectric companies in the same region, and for engaging in the same activism to which Ms. Andres dedicated herself. The IJ accepted that Ms. Andres was shot at and chased through the woods by armed men because she participated in a political protest and that women with her were beaten and harmed. And the IJ accepted that Ms. Andres was forced to remain in hiding for ten months, during which time she continued to receive threats. Though the IJ said he lacked sufficient detail about the nature of these threats, he did not doubt that they happened. I think the attempt on Ms. Andres's life coupled with the later threats that she received easily meet our standard for establishing past persecution.
It also appears that the IJ erred by denying Ms. Andres's claim on the ground that she did not suffer "permanent psychological harm." Under our precedent, that is not a required showing. In Sanchez Jimenez, for example, [*9]  a panel of this Court overturned the IJ's determination that the petitioner did not show past persecution simply because the petitioner "was not physically harmed." 492 F.3d at 1233. The panel reasoned that "attempted murder is persecution" regardless of the "poor marksmanship" of the shooters who attempted to kill the asylum petitioner but missed. Id. at 1233-34. The Sanchez Jimenez panel also did not require that the petitioner show permanent psychological harm from the attempt on his life: the fact that gunmen attempted to kill him was sufficient. See id. Sanchez Jimenez compels us to reach the same conclusion here. The fact that the people who attacked Ms. Andres and other protestors failed to successfully shoot or catch her does not undermine her claim that she was subject to past persecution. That she also did not present evidence of permanent psychological damage does not undermine this conclusion. I therefore conclude that Ms. Andres is likely to prevail on her claim that the IJ erred in holding that she was not subject to past persecution.
2. Exclusion of relevant expert testimony
I also think Ms. Andres is likely to show the BIA erred in rejecting her argument that the IJ violated her due process rights [*10]  by refusing to hear the testimony of an expert on the conditions in her region of Guatemala. It is well established that a noncitizen in removal proceedings has a right to a "fundamentally fair hearing" under the Fifth Amendment Due Process Clause. Dakane v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 399 F.3d 1269, 1273 (11th Cir. 2005) (per curiam). Under our precedent, due process and agency regulations require the IJ to "consider all evidence introduced by the applicant." Tan v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 446 F.3d 1369, 1374 (11th Cir. 2006). Here, despite his obligation to hear and consider evidence, the IJ declined to hear from an expert who would have testified about indigenous land rights disputes in Ms. Andres's region and current political conditions there. Such evidence would clearly have been relevant to the question of whether Ms. Andres had a well-founded fear of persecution upon her return to Guatemala.
Instead of considering this evidence, the IJ excluded it and relied on speculation to support his conclusion that Ms. Andres failed to show an objective basis for her fear of persecution. To take just one example, the IJ reasoned that the risk to Ms. Andres had diminished because the mayor who was in power when she fled Guatemala had since been replaced. Based solely on the absence of evidence to the contrary, the IJ reasoned that "the current mayor of respondent's [*11]  hometown is, apparently, not as opposed to the indigenous groups. At least there was no evidence that he was." Such conjecture is scarcely worthy of traffic court. IJs may not rely on "speculative assumptions . . . untethered from any evidential foundation" in reaching their conclusions. See Todorovic v. U.S. Att'y Gen., 621 F.3d 1318, 1326 (11th Cir. 2010) (rejecting the use of speculation or conjecture as the basis of a negative credibility finding). And to rely on such speculation after declining to hear an expert who could have offered substantive testimony clarifying important factual questions is baffling. In my view, Ms. Andres is likely to succeed in her challenge to the IJ's decision to refuse to consider relevant, probative evidence.
The dissent argues that, even if the IJ was mistaken in refusing the expert testimony, Ms. Andres has not shown that his failure to do so prejudiced her case. The dissent relies on Lapaix v. U.S. Atty. Gen., 605 F.3d 1138 (11th Cir. 2010), in suggesting that Ms. Andres needed to submit an affidavit or declaration describing the expert testimony. But Lapaix does not require something so detailed. Lapaix stands for the proposition that where an IJ does not "refuse to hear admissible testimony" and where the noncitizen offers "no explanation" as to how the IJ got something [*12]  wrong, there is not sufficient evidence of prejudice. Id. at 1144. For Ms. Andres, the IJ not only refused to hear the expert testimony, he relied on the lack of record evidence about the political conditions in Ms. Andres's hometown in determining she was not at risk of future persecution. Ms. Andres was thus prejudiced by the lack of the exact type of evidence the IJ refused to let her introduce.
B.
I also think Ms. Andres has satisfied the other Nken factors. The government does not contest that she is likely to be irreparably injured absent a stay. See Nken, 556 U.S. at 434, 129 S. Ct. at 1761. And based on my review of the record, removal to Guatemala would expose Ms. Andres to a significant likelihood of being harmed or killed. I also note that Ms. Andres has three children, including an infant who was born in the United States. Deporting them with Ms. Andres would separate them from their father, who is also pursuing an asylum claim, and possibly deprive the children of their ability to qualify for derivative relief.
The remaining stay factors—whether a stay will substantially injure the government and where the public interest lies—are merged here because the government is the opposing party. Nken, 556 U.S. at 435, 129 S. Ct. at 1762. While the public has an interest [*13]  in "prompt execution of removal orders," it also has an "interest in preventing [petitioners] from being wrongfully removed, particularly to countries where they are likely to face substantial harm," id. at 436, 129 S. Ct. at 1762. Staying Ms. Andres's removal promotes this important interest.
Dissent by: NEWSOM  
Dissent




NEWSOM, Circuit Judge, dissenting:
I respectfully dissent from the Court's order granting Ms. Andres' emergency motion for a stay of removal.
Ms. Andres filed an emergency stay motion pending her appeal to this Court. The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) dismissed her earlier appeal of an Immigration Judge's (IJ) denial of her application for asylum, withholding of removal, and deferral of removal under the Convention Against Torture. Ms. Andres claims that she came to the United States after being targeted in Guatemala for her political activities pertaining to the land rights of indigenous people. After a hearing, the IJ found that Ms. Andres had failed to establish past persecution or a well-founded fear of future persecution and denied her petition, and the BIA subsequently dismissed her appeal. In her motion to us, Ms. Andres claims (1) that she is likely to succeed on the merits of her appeal and (2) that the IJ [*14]  improperly failed to consider testimony from an expert witness on indigenous land rights.
To obtain a stay of removal, Ms. Andres must show (among other things) that she has a substantial likelihood of success on the merits of her appeal and that she will suffer irreparable injury in the absence of a stay. Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434, 129 S. Ct. 1749, 173 L. Ed. 2d 550 (2009). If I were at liberty to consider Ms. Andres' asylum claim de novo, I might conclude that she had demonstrated the required substantial likelihood of success. But I am not, and so I cannot. Under well-established circuit precedent, we can grant relief only "when the record compels a reversal" of the BIA's decision. Sanchez Jimenez v. U.S. Atty. Gen., 492 F.3d 1223, 1230 (11th Cir. 2007) (emphasis added) (quotation omitted). In my view, the record here in no way "compels" a determination that the IJ and BIA were wrong to deny Ms. Andres' application.
First, Ms. Andres failed to establish that she was specifically targeted for her political activities in Guatemala or that she has a well-founded fear of future persecution. Persecution, we have repeatedly said, is an "extreme concept, requiring more than a few isolated incidents of verbal harassment or intimidation." Id. at 1232. Here, Ms. Andres alleges that while in Guatemala, she was in a large crowd protesting when [*15]  anti-indigenous groups began shooting randomly into the mass of people. Ms. Andres herself was uninjured and escaped, and neither she nor anyone in her immediate family was harmed during the ten months following the incident and prior to her arrival in the United States. Although Ms. Andres testified that she was threatened, she provided little evidence about the nature of those threats or whether any of them occurred in person. Her experience stands in stark contrast to the persecution that we deemed sufficient in Sanchez Jiminez, where a father and daughter were specifically targeted by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC) through repeated phone calls, an attempted kidnapping, and an attempted murder. Id. at 1229. None of this is to minimize the horror that Ms. Andres suffered, but simply to underscore that the evidence here does not in my view "compel" the conclusion that the IJ's and BIA's decisions are insupportable.
Second, Ms. Andres has failed to show that the IJ's exclusion of her expert witness—even if erroneous—caused her substantial prejudice. See Lapaix v. U.S. Atty. Gen, 605 F.3d 1138, 1143 (11th Cir. 2010). To show the requisite prejudice, Ms. Andres must demonstrate that "in the absence of the alleged violations, the outcome [*16]  of [her] proceeding would have been different." Id. To do this, Ms. Andres would have had to submit some evidence—an affidavit, a declaration, a proffer, etc.—explaining what her expert's testimony would have been. She failed to do so. Without having any idea what the expert would have said—let alone that it would have changed the IJ's mind—I simply cannot conclude that Ms. Andres suffered any prejudice.

 

End of Document
