
I respectfully dissent. The agency's "credibility determinations are findings of fact," Rizk v. Holder, 629 F.3d 1083, 1087 (9th Cir. 2011), that "are conclusive unless any reasonable adjudicator would be compelled to conclude to the contrary," id. (quoting 8 U.S.C. § 1252(b)(4)(B)). In my view, substantial evidence supports two of the bases relied upon by the BIA in affirming the IJ's determination that Vo was not credible. Because Vo fails to point to evidence sufficient to support her applications in the absence of her credible testimony, I would deny the petition. See Farah v. Ashcroft, 348 F.3d 1153, 1156 (9th Cir. 2003).
1. Although the "mere omission of details [in an asylum application] is insufficient to uphold an adverse credibility finding," Silva-Pereira v. Lynch, 827 F.3d 1176, 1185 (9th Cir. 2016) (quoting Lai v. Holder, 773 F.3d 966, 971 (9th Cir. 2014)), the agency can make such a finding based on "omissions that are not 'details,' but new allegations that tell a 'much different—and more compelling—story of persecution than the initial application.'" Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting Zamanov v. Holder, 649 F.3d 969, 974 (9th Cir. 2011)). That is what happened here.
In her testimony before the IJ, Vo added an entirely new allegation of persecution by the Vietnamese police that she had omitted from her sworn statement, her credible fear interview, and the declaration that she prepared with her attorney and submitted to support her asylum application. For the first time, she alleged that one of the officers commented that she was likely a virgin and squeezed her breast. By adding this new allegation of sexual assault, Vo undoubtedly provided a "more compelling . . . story of persecution." Id. As we have recognized quite correctly, sexual assault may constitute persecution on its own. See, e.g., Garcia-Martinez v. Ashcroft, 371 F.3d 1066, 1072 (9th Cir. 2004). By including these allegations in her testimony, but not in her sworn statement, her credible fear interview, or her declaration, Vo created a more compelling account of persecution at the hearing. The agency was within its bounds to rely on this inconsistency to find Vo not credible. Silva-Pereira, 827 F.3d at 1185.
I disagree with the majority's reasons for rejecting the agency's finding. To my knowledge, we have never announced a rule that the omission of a sexual assault allegation cannot support an adverse credibility determination. Instead, we have held that the agency should excuse such an omission when the petitioner "provide[s] a compelling explanation for her failure to mention her [sexual assault] at an earlier time in the proceedings." Mousa v. Mukasey, 530 F.3d 1025, 1028 (9th Cir. 2008). For example, substantial evidence might not support an adverse credibility finding if the evidence demonstrated a "cultural reluctance to admit the fact that it had occurred." Id.; see also Paramasamy v. Ashcroft, 295 F.3d 1047, 1053 (9th Cir. 2002) ("[The petitioner] provided a strong, unrebutted explanation for her reluctance to reveal details—her cultural reluctance to tell male interviewers that she had been violated."). Vo did not provide a compelling explanation here.
Moreover, the agency offered a more-than-sufficient basis for rejecting the explanations Vo did offer. As it noted, Vo's omission was troubling because, "as opposed to the interviews at the border and with the [asylum officer]," Vo submitted her declaration after "careful preparation with her attorney." When questioned by the IJ about the omission, Vo explained: (1) she thought she could "present and say that at court," (2) she had never told anyone before, and (3) that she didn't want her mother to know. The agency rejected each explanation. As the IJ found, Vo's explanations did not account for such a significant omission, particularly in the context of her "careful[ly] prepar[ed]" declaration. And the BIA elaborated further, stating that Vo's explanations that "she was afraid that her mother and family may find out about the incident" and that "she thought she did not need to detail this incident" were not reasonable because of the detailed nature of her declaration.1  Even if these explanations were plausible, the agency did not unreasonably reject them. See Zamanov, 649 F.3d at 974; see also Kin v. Holder, 595 F.3d 1050, 1057 (9th Cir. 2010) (concluding that the petitioner's explanation that he believed a particular incident would be discussed at a hearing was "not persuasive enough to compel the conclusion that the omissions [from his asylum application] were immaterial").
2. I also would conclude that substantial evidence supports the agency's adverse credibility determination based on the inconsistencies between Vo's statements at her credible fear interview and her hearing testimony about the presence of her mother at the police station following her initial release from custody. As the agency recounted, Vo's testimony about her mother at her hearings was very detailed. She testified that (1) her mother came to the police station and begged for her release every day, (2) her mother filled out paper work at another location, (3) her mother came to her cell, (4) her mother didn't come to her cell, (5) her mother was waiting for her outside, (6) her mother took her home, and (7) the police gave her mother two options: "go back to where I was" or "stay in the city of Ho Chi Minh." But a few months earlier at her credible fear interview, Vo made no mention of her mother's presence when she was released from custody and instead said she went home alone. When asked to explain these inconsistent statements, Vo stated she did not remember her mother was there when she was released after the first arrest. The agency rejected this explanation as implausible.
Given the detailed testimony she provided about her mother at the hearings, which conflicted with her statements at her credible fear interview, I would find that substantial evidence supported the agency's conclusion. Moreover, this is not a case in which petitioner was asked to testify in detail about events that occurred long ago; Vo's credible fear interview occurred approximately six months after her initial arrest in Vietnam and she testified before the IJ only a few months after her credible fear interview. Thus, I cannot conclude that the record compels a conclusion contrary to the agency's.
* * *
When reviewing adverse credibility determinations, our role is not to stand in the shoes of the BIA or IJ. Instead, we must ask whether the record compels a conclusion contrary to the agency's. I cannot say that it does. For that reason, I dissent.

 

