ing).
I concur fully in the dissenting opinion of Justice WEAVER, but write separately to highlight the import of Justice TAYLOR'S lead opinion: Today, the members of the lead opinion, 1  for unarticulated policy reasons of their own, ignore the explicit contract language at issue and obliterate the distinction recognized in our law between subjective and objective standards in insurance exclusion provisions. 2  
 In an apparent policy-driven view that even the most fanciful beliefs merit insurance coverage, the standard articulated by the lead opinion conflates any meaningful distinction between a subjective and objective contractual standard. The lead opinion cites no precedent or other legal authority for its position. There is none. The new alleged "objective standard" announced in the lead opinion today leaves an insurer unable to exclude even the most dangerous intentional or criminal behavior from coverage as a matter of law, so long as an insured claims to believe that something innocuous would result from his dangerous conduct. 3  The policy language of exclusion at issue here could not more explicitly preclude coverage for the intentional or criminal conduct of an insured. I believe it to be the view of those joining the lead opinion that it would violate an as yet unarticulated "public policy" if an insurer could by contract preclude coverage under the facts of this case. Indeed, the lead opinion (and its bastardization of the traditional objective standard that should be applied here) seems driven by its concern that "an intentional or criminal act . . . will almost never be covered by a policy with this exclusion." My response is that I am prepared to enforce the contract the parties have made as written. 4 
 Insurance contracts generally provide indemnity against injuries caused by "accidents." When they expressly exclude coverage for injuries caused by intentional or criminal behavior as determined by a "reasonable person" objective standard, I am prepared to apply the traditional, unvarnished objective standard Michigan courts have employed in assessing whether the injury was "reasonably expected."
The intentional or criminal acts exclusion of the policy at issue precludes coverage for injuries or damage "which may reasonably be expected to result" from the intentional or criminal acts or omissions of an insured. For time out of mind until now, common law courts have understood the distinction between subjective and objective standards. 5  An objective test assesses what a reasonable person would have believed, while a subjective test is concerned about determining what the actual actor believed. In this context, where all members of this Court agree the contract requires application of an objective standard, I contend that what may "reasonably be expected to result" from an insured's acts is the conclusion a reasonable person reaches after examining all of the pertinent information available to the insured. See footnote 5. The belief of the insured, on the other hand, is the subjective conclusion reached by the insured armed with the same information. While the belief of the insured may be a fact, it is not an ultimate fact 6  essential to determining what may reasonably be expected to result from an insured's actions.
The lead opinion errs in using the insured's subjective belief (purportedly) "as a starting point," then insisting that the "objective" evaluation proceed by determining whether a reasonable person, sharing the insured's subjective belief, would expect the same result. Requiring that the reasonable person take as a determinative fact the insured's subjective beliefs about his acts violates every known formulation or application of the traditional objective standard. The majority cites no authority for its contrary and idiosyncratic formulation of its "objective" standard. It is noteworthy that, in other contexts, this Court has expressly repudiated similar efforts to make subjective an objective standard. 7 
 Thus, it is unclear why (and on what authority) the lead opinion concludes that a reasonable person should be required to possess the same (and entirely subjective) belief as the insured.
As I argued in McCarn I, a reasonable person could certainly come to a different belief regarding the expected consequences under the known and undisputed facts of this case. 8  Under the standard announced by the lead opinion, I cannot envision a single scenario where a "reasonable person" expectation could ever diverge from the insured's expectation. 9  More critically, I am at a loss to determine any difference, much less a qualitative one, between the purported objective standard articulated in the lead opinion today and the policy exclusion language found to require a subjective determination in Metropolitan Ins v DiCicco. 10  There, a policy which excluded damage "expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured" was found to require a subjective standard of expectation. 11 
 I note that, had the views of the lead opinion garnered majority support, the subjective standard would have become the uniform standard for all insurance policies, no matter what language was actually used. Under the standard articulated by the lead opinion, an insurance company would be required to provide coverage even where, for example, an insured believes that his gun was magical and would only play "The Star Spangled Banner" when the trigger was pulled. After all, using the insured's claimed belief as a starting point, no reasonable person would expect that bodily harm would result from a rousing rendition of our national anthem. 12  I invite those justices joining the lead opinion to explain why its analysis today would permit a contrary result.
 For these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Maura D. Corrigan 

 

