, Jr.; Brian K. Zahra  
Concur




Young, C.J. (concurring).
I fully join this Court's order and write only to answer a criticism the dissenting statement raises. Justice Cavanagh quotes my dissenting opinion in United States Fidelity Ins & Guar Co v Michigan Catastrophic Claims Ass'n (On Reh'g), 484 Mich 1, 27, 795 N.W.2d 101 (2009) (YOUNG, J., dissenting), and rhetorically asks the question I raised in that case — "What changed?" — that would lead me to support rehearing in the instant case.
The answer is simple: the majority opinion in USF & G prevailed over my dissenting opinion, and I see no reason to remain bound by a position that failed to receive majority support two years ago. 1  Today's order merely applies the very same principles that former Justice Weaver and Justices Hathaway, Marilyn Kelly and notably Justice Cavanagh himself applied in deciding to grant rehearing in USF & G. And although Justice Cavanagh dissents from the order in this case, he does not repudiate his decision to grant rehearing in USF & G. Instead, his dissent in the instant case is fully premised on his belief that this Court's previous disposition on the mootness issue "was properly decided." Because I continue to hold the opposite belief—that this Court erred in issuing an opinion on the merits of a moot case—I 2  fully join today's order.
Zahra, J. (concurring).
I concur in the order granting rehearing, which vacates this Court's opinion of December 29, 2010, as well as the Court of Appeals' opinion of March 31, 2009. I write separately to address the propriety of granting a motion for rehearing when there has been a change in the makeup of the Court between the time the Court's initial opinion is released and the date the motion for rehearing is decided.
MCR 7.313(E), this Court's rule governing motions for rehearing, is a discretionary rule as it does not define a standard under which this Court is to decide motions for rehearing. 3  Thus, whether to grant or deny the motion is left to the discretion of the Court. Historically, in exercising discretion, the Justices of this Court consider whether the Court properly interpreted and applied the law. This explains why Justices typically cast votes on rehearing that are consistent with their initial view of the case. 4  Generally speaking, a Justice will only change his or her vote when the legal arguments on rehearing persuade the Justice that his or her initial view of the case was erroneous. Not surprisingly, Justices Marilyn Kelly, Cavanagh, Hathaway, Markman and Chief Justice Young view this case in the same light that they did on the date the original opinion was issued. The instant motion thus rises or falls on the votes cast by myself and Justice Mary Beth Kelly. Because we were not seated on the Court when the initial opinion was released, we have no established position in this case.
It is suggested that Justice Mary Beth Kelly and I ought not cast our votes based on the merit of the legal arguments and the correctness of the opinion that is the subject of rehearing and, instead, limit our review to a determination whether any new arguments have been presented to this Court that were not previously presented at the time the opinion under review was released. Nothing in MCR 7.313(E), however, supports the notion that the Court may only grant rehearing where new legal arguments are presented. Significantly, such a constraint exists in the pertinent court rule for the Court of Appeals. Specifically, MCR 7.215(I)(1), which governs motions for rehearing and reconsideration in the Court of Appeals, states that "[m]otions for reconsideration are subject to the restrictions contained in MCR 2.119(F)(3)." MCR 2.119(F)(3) in turn provides that:
Generally, and without restricting the discretion of the court, a motion for rehearing or reconsideration which merely presents the same issues ruled on by the court, either expressly or by reasonable implication, will not be granted. The moving party must demonstrate a palpable error by which the court and the parties have been misled and show that a different disposition of the motion must result from correction of the error.
The absence of any reference to MCR 2.119(F) in the rule governing motions for rehearing in this Court, and the express reference to it in the equivalent Court of Appeals rule, leads me to conclude that in deciding the pending motion it is appropriate to consider whether the Court's December 29, 2010 opinion was properly decided, rather than limit review to the question regarding whether new arguments are presented on rehearing. 5 
  This same conclusion has been reached by virtually every Justice faced with this situation. Then-Justice Alton Davis voted to grant reconsideration where he concluded the Court's prior order was erroneous. Duncan v State of Michigan, 488 Mich 957, 790 N.W.2d 695 (2010) (Davis, J., concurring). Likewise, Justice Hathaway voted to grant rehearing and vacate an opinion originally issued before she joined the Court. United States Fidelity Ins & Guaranty Co v Michigan Catastrophic Claims Ass'n (On Rehearing), 484 Mich 1, 795 N.W.2d 101 (2009). 6  Then-Justice Corrigan and Chief Justice Young did the same in McCready v Hoffius, 459 Mich 1235; 593 N.W.2d 545 (1999). History informs us that this is not a recent trend in the Court. See, e.g., Harmsen v Fizzell, 354 Mich 60; 92 N.W.2d 631 (1958); Weller v Mancha, 353 Mich 189; 91 N.W.2d 352 (1958); Rumney v Coville, 51 Mich 186; 16 N.W. 372 (1883). 7 
 The inquiry does not end, in my opinion, upon review of the correctness of the decision under review. As is evident from the substance of the dissent in this case, which echoes the dissent of Chief Justice YOUNG in United States Fidelity Ins & Guar Co, 484 Mich at 27, it can be unsettling to this Court when within the period for rehearing, interpretation of the law changes due to a change in the composition of the Court. See also Sazima v Shepherd Bar & Restaurant, 483 Mich 924; 762 N.W.2d 924 (2009) (Markman, J., dissenting). Because of these concerns, my discretion is also guided by consideration of the jurisprudential significance of the issues presented on rehearing.
Justice Cavanagh claims that the newly composed Court is "undoing recent precedent." Like every Justice on this Court, I respect the role stare decisis plays in Michigan's jurisprudence. That said, every Justice on this Court, with the exception of Justice Mary Beth Kelly and myself, has at one time or another found it appropriate to overrule precedent because the Justice concluded doing so served the best interests of Michigan's jurisprudence. See e.g., Regents of University of Michigan v Titan Ins Co, 487 Mich 289, 791 N.W.2d 897 (2010); Robinson v City of Detroit, 462 Mich 439; 613 N.W.2d 307 (2000). In my view, the order granting rehearing and vacating the December 29, 2010 opinion does not undo precedent; it restores precedent. Simply stated, the Court disregarded the mootness doctrine so that it could overrule Preserve the Dunes, Inc v Dep't of Environmental Quality, 471 Mich 508; 684 N.W.2d 847 (2004), and change the course of over a century of established Michigan water law. Rehearing is properly granted here, not only because the underlying dispute is moot, but also because Preserve the Dunes properly interprets Michigan law. 8 
I also disagree with Justice Cavanagh that the order granting rehearing runs afoul of City of Erie v Pap's AM, 529 U.S. 277; 120 S. Ct. 1382; 146 L. Ed. 2d 265 (2000). When considering the instant case in its procedural entirety, the situation here is unlike the one in City of Erie. 9  In particular, Merit Energy Company's alternative plan for remediating the pollutant in its groundwater was largely dictated by the circuit court decision to vacate Merit's permit allowing  discharge into Kolke Creek. As Chief Justice YOUNG set forth in his dissenting opinion:
The lead opinion claims that "the trial court has left open the door for Merit to discharge treated water into Kolke Creek at a lower than originally proposed rate." This claim appears plausible when looking solely at the circuit court's June 26, 2007, amended opinion. But that opinion was superseded by subsequent events. In particular, the circuit court's January 31, 2008, opinion ruled that the DEQ had erroneously issued a permit to Merit. Both the Court of Appeals and, eventually, this Court denied defendants' applications for leave to appeal, leaving intact the circuit court's opinion. Accordingly, even if the circuit court's June 26, 2007, decision "left open the door for Merit to discharge treated water into Kolke Creek," its January 31, 2008, decision closed that door, and this Court's denial of leave bolted the door shut. Further, without either physical access to Kolke Creek or a valid permit, Merit has no lawful authority to discharge any amount of anything into Kolke Creek. [Anglers of the AuSable v DEQ, 488 Mich. 69, 107, 793 N.W.2d 596 (2010) (footnote omitted).]
Thus, unlike the voluntary and unilateral actions on the part of the plaintiff in City of Erie, the vacation of Merit's permit and this Court's decision to deny leave came about independently from Merit and without action on the part of Merit. As a result, the situation here is not one where a party's voluntary actions are an attempt to insulate a favorable decision from review. Rather, the independent court action invalidating Merit's permit moves this case entirely outside the concerns raised in City of Erie. 10  Accordingly, I concur in the Court's order to grant rehearing.
Mary Beth Kelly, J., joins the statement of Zahra, J.
