 (In Part)  
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I dissent from the majority's order reversing the Court of Appeals' judgment. Instead, I would affirm that portion of the Court of Appeals judgment affirming the dismissal of plaintiff's claims based on the Equine Activity Liability Act (EALA), MCL 691.1661 et seq. 1  
MCL 691.1663 limits the liability of "an equine activity sponsor, an equine professional, or another person" (a "horse owner") when the alleged injury or damage "result[s] from an inherent risk of an equine activity." 2  This limitation on liability applies "[e]xcept as otherwise provided in [MCL 691.1665]." MCL 691.1665, in turn, provides exceptions to the EALA's limitation on liability when the horse owner "does" an enumerated item:
(a) Provides equipment or tack and knows or should know that the equipment or tack is faulty, and the equipment or tack is faulty to the extent that it is a proximate cause of the injury, death, or damage.
(b) Provides an equine and fails to make reasonable and prudent efforts to determine the ability of the participant to engage safely in the equine activity and to determine the ability of the participant to safely manage the particular equine. . . .
(c) Owns, leases, rents, has authorized use of, or otherwise is in lawful possession and control of land or facilities on which the participant sustained injury because of a dangerous latent condition of the land or facilities that is known to the [horse owner] and for which warning signs are not conspicuously posted.
(d) Commits a negligent act or omission that constitutes a proximate cause of the injury, death, or damage. 3 
I agree with the Court of Appeals that MCL 691.1665(d) cannot be construed as broadly allowing general negligence claims without completely  eviscerating the entire concept of limited liability under the EALA. MCL 691.1665 must be read in conjunction with MCL 691.1663 to give effect to the act as a whole. 4  Giving effect to both provisions, the Court of Appeals  correctly interpreted the exception of MCL 691.1665(d) as involving "human error" "not within the gamut of 'inherent[ly] risk[y]. . . equine activity.'" 5  
This interpretation is further bolstered by reading MCL 691.1665(d) with the other listed exceptions in the statute. "Under the statutory construction doctrine known as ejusdem generis, where a general term follows a series of specific terms, the general term is interpreted 'to include only things of the same kind, class, character, or nature as those specifically enumerated.'" 6  
MCL 691.1665 provides such "a general term follow[ing] a series of specific terms." Subsections (a) - (c) provide specific exceptions in specific situations: where the horse owner has provided faulty tack, failed to match the rider's ability to the horse's personality, or failed to warn of a known latent dangerous condition on the land. Each of these exceptions obviously involves an equine activity and a danger that could potentially arise in the course of that activity. However, each also involves an affirmative act or omission on the part of the horse owner, above and beyond the "inherent" or essential risks of an equine activity, which makes the equine activity even more dangerous. Therefore, we must interpret the more general negligence exception of subsection (d) "to include only things of the same kind, class, character, or nature" as the more specific, preceding subsections. Accordingly, a negligence claim pursuant to subsection (d) must also involve a negligent act or omission beyond the "inherent" risk of the equine activity, making the activity even more dangerous.
Moreover, the majority order, as well as Justice MARKMAN's concurring statement, base their interpretation of the negligence exception to the EALA on an overly narrow and faulty linchpin: that the exception was intended simply to eliminate strict liability for horse owners. However, this interpretation fails to consider that, if the Legislature's goal were merely to eliminate strict liability, it could have accomplished that goal in a much simpler and more direct fashion. Instead, the Legislature drafted a complex limitation on liability for injuries arising from an inherent risk of an equine activity and accompanied that limitation with numerous specific exceptions. Those exceptions must be read according to the canon of construction ejusdem generis in order to give effect to the statute as a whole. But the majority's and Justice MARKMAN's narrow focus on the legislative purpose of abolishing strict liability leads to an interpretation of MCL 691.1665(d) that violates this basic canon of statutory construction.
Here, plaintiff was injured while assisting defendant to saddle a horse. Saddling a horse in preparation of riding is clearly an equine activity and a horse's unexpected and negative reaction to being saddled is clearly an inherent risk of such activity. 7  Further, both plaintiff and defendant were aware of the particular horse's personality and of plaintiff's level of experience with horses. Specifically, defendant described the horse as "green broke" and plaintiff admitted her knowledge that the horse was "fast" and could be ridden only with defendant's supervision. The deposition testimony and the expert letter provided  by plaintiff all indicate that this horse may have reacted negatively to being saddled no matter what method defendant used to effectuate the saddling. Accordingly, plaintiff cannot establish that defendant committed human error above and beyond the inherent or essential risk of this equine activity such that defendant increased the danger involved in the activity. 8  As a result, plaintiff has not created a genuine issue of material fact that her claim falls within the negligence exception to the EALA limitation on liability. 9  For this reason, I would affirm the Court of Appeals judgment affirming the trial court's dismissal of plaintiff's claims.
WEAVER and CORRIGAN, JJ., join the statement of YOUNG, J.

 

