ing).
I fully concur with the dissenting statement of Justice Corrigan. I write separately to note that the new majority's decision in this case reflects this Court's more recent hostility to the notion of governmental immunity and any other legislatively imposed measure that reduces the volume of civil litigation in this state. This decision hearkens back to our predecessors' refusal to recognize the legislative prerogative to regulate when and how the state may be sued. 4  
Since its inception, the concept of sovereign immunity has given the state government and its agencies the broadest possible protection from civil suit. The concept of sovereign, or governmental, immunity dates back to English common law. It is based on the premise that the sovereign is the law and, therefore, cannot be sued as of right in its own courts. 5  Rather, the sovereign must "expressly permita suit against it." 6  Consistent with that concept, this Court, until the 1970s, historically held that the state was entitled to place conditions on the suits it permitted against itself. 7  For at least 70 years, this Court strictly upheld the plain language of such statutes that required prior notice to the government agency as a precondition for suit. 8  
Despite this long history respecting governmental immunity, the modern Court has eschewed legislatively imposed conditions on lawsuits and eroded the government's innate immunity. Beginning in 1970, justices of this Court began to question the due process implications of treating plaintiffs who sue a governmental defendant differently from those who sue a  private entity. 9  Subsequently, the Court held that the differentiation between suits against private and governmental defendants violated the equal protection rights of plaintiffs. 10  
The Court eventually acknowledged the intellectual incoherence of its constitutional assault on governmental immunity and held that a notice provision might be constitutionally valid if it "serve[s] a permissible purpose, such as to prevent prejudice . . . ." 11  The Court held that the only possible legitimate purpose that a notice provision could serve is to prevent prejudice against the governmental defendant. Accordingly, in the 1970s, the Court judicially rewrote notice provisions in governmental immunity statutes by engrafting a nonexistent "actual prejudice" element. 12  The Court upheld this judicially created element in governmental immunity notice provisions through 1996. 13  Conceding that the "actual prejudice" element was not in the plain language of such statutory notice provisions, the Court held that the Legislature had "acquiesced" in this interpretation because it had not amended the governmental immunity statutes to "overrule" the judicially engrafted element. 14  
The earlier Court's ever evolving legal rationale to limit governmental immunity notice provisions evinced a policy-driven desire to promote suits against government defendants. The language of these provisions is clear and unambiguous; yet, the Court went to great lengths "to justify and enforce its hostility" toward the concept of governmental immunity and to supplant its policy choice for that of the Legislature. 15  
However, as this Court has more recently reiterated, governmental immunity legislation is constitutionally valid because it is reasonably related to several legitimate government interests. 16  Notice provisions afford the government "'the opportunity to investigate and evaluate a claim.'" 17  They protect the government's publicly funded treasury from "'unjust raids . . . by unscrupulous prosecution of trumped-up, exaggerated, and stale claims, by requiring a claimant to give definite information . . . at a time when the matter is fresh, conditions unchanged, and witnesses thereto and to the accident within reach.'" 18  More broadly, notice provisions are constitutional because the Legislature created them as "quid pro quo for its relinquishment of immunity" in relation to civil suits permitted under the exceptions to governmental immunity. 19  
Despite the various well-reasoned purposes notice provisions serve, justices of the modern Court have boldly stated:
[W]e acknowledge frankly that statutes which limit access to the courts by people seeking redress for wrongs are not looked upon with favor by us. We acquiesce in the enforcement of statutes of limitation when we are not persuaded that they unduly restrict such access, but we look askance at devices such as notice requirements which have the effect of shortening the period of time set forth in such statutes. 20 
Although commendable for its blunt honesty, such a statement undermines our tripartite system of government and is acutely repugnant to the right of the people to express their views through their elected representatives in the Legislature. This is rule by a judicial oligarchy. It is completely contrary to our judicial function. Reversion to overruled caselaw that proudly usurps the legislative function in this fashion is exactly what the new majority has accomplished by ignoring Rowland and engrafting a "substantial compliance" exception onto the notice provision in the public building exception to governmental immunity. 21  
The new majority's reversion is not surprising given its members' past expressions of distaste for governmental immunity principles. For example, members of the new majority have repudiated the concept that immunity is a characteristic of government and would foist the duty of raising immunity onto the government as an affirmative defense. 22  The members of the new majority have not limited their disapproval of legislative limitations on causes of action to those against the government.  They have challenged statutes  of limitations, notice and tolling provisions, and express limitations in the Legislature's defined parameters on causes of action. 23  
As noted by Justice Corrigan, the exercise sub silentio of judicial power will reign supreme in the new order the new majority desires to create.
For these reasons and those stated in Justice Corrigan's statement, I dissent from the new majority's decision to vacate our prior, precedentially supported order to reverse the Court of Appeals judgment and to simply deny leave to appeal without explanation of the majority's failure to follow Rowland.
CORRIGAN and MARKMAN, JJ., join the statement of YOUNG, J.

 

