, Jr.    
Concur




YOUNG, J.
Although this Court is equally divided on the appropriate legal analysis, this Court is unanimous regarding the proper result. All members of this Court agree that the insurance policy at issue is not latently ambiguous and that it must therefore be enforced as written. According to the plain language of the policy's pollution exclusion clause, it is clear that sewage is a "pollutant." Moreover, this Court is in unanimous agreement that equitable estoppel is not applicable. Accordingly, all members of this Court agree that the judgment of the Court of Appeals must be reversed and this case remanded to the trial court for entry of an order granting the Michigan Municipal Liability and Property Pool's motion for summary disposition. 1  
 While all justices conclude that sewage is a "pollutant" under the clear and unambiguous language of the policy's pollution exclusion clause, the justices joining this opinion believe that principles of contract  enforcement require special proofs when a contracting party seeks to vary the terms of a written agreement by alleging latent ambiguity. Thus, while extrinsic evidence  generally may be introduced to demonstrate the existence of a latent ambiguity, we conclude that a court must presume that the contracting parties' intent is manifested in the actual language used in the contract itself unless the party alleging the existence of the latent ambiguity rebuts this presumption by proving with clear and convincing evidence that such an ambiguity does indeed exist. Here, we conclude that the city of Grosse Pointe Park has not presented clear and convincing evidence to demonstrate that a latent ambiguity actually exits. We further conclude that the Pool is not equitably estopped from denying coverage because, under the well-established rule articulated by this Court in Ruddock v Detroit Life Ins Co 2  and reiterated in Kirschner v Process Design Assoc, Inc, 3  estoppel will not be applied to expand coverage beyond the particular risks covered by the actual insurance policy itself.
I. FACTS & PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In 1938, Grosse Pointe Park and the city of Detroit entered into an agreement under which Grosse Pointe Park was permitted to discharge overflow sewage into Fox Creek, a tributary near the Grosse Pointe Park-Detroit border. Release of excess sewage into Fox Creek was necessary because Grosse Pointe Park's "combined" sewer system--a single sewer line used to transport both sewage (e.g., from toilets) and storm water runoff--would become overtaxed during periods of heavy rainfall. If Grosse Pointe Park did not use Fox Creek as a release valve during such periods, sewage would back up into the basements of homes and businesses. It is undisputed that from  1940 to 1995, Grosse Pointe Park released overflow rainwater and sewage into Fox Creek hundreds of times. 4  
Each year from 1985 to 1998, Grosse Pointe Park purchased annual "occurrence-based" commercial general liability policies from the Pool, a self-insurance pool comprised of local governments. 5  During this period, under successive annual  policies, the Pool paid numerous insurance claims submitted by Grosse Pointe Park residents for sewage backups that occurred in their  basements. It did so without issuing reservation of rights letters based on the policies' pollution exclusion clauses, unlike in the present case. The particular insurance policy at issue covers the period from August 1, 1994, to August 1, 1995.
 The current dispute derives from an underlying class action (the Etheridge litigation) brought by Grosse Pointe Park residents against the city for discharges made into Fox Creek in July 1995. In the Etheridge complaint, filed on September 14, 1995, the class action plaintiffs sued Grosse Pointe Park under various trespass, nuisance, and negligence theories for sewage backups that occurred in their homes and businesses. In addition to basement backup claims, the Etheridge plaintiffs also submitted insurance claims for alleged damage caused to boats, docks, seawalls, garages, lawns, shrubbery, and outdoor furniture resulting from the city's release of sewage into Fox Creek. 
On October 6, 1995, three weeks after the Etheridge suit was filed, the Pool provided the city a defense under a reservation of rights letter. In the letter, the Pool specifically quoted the insurance policy's pollution exclusion clause and warned the city that it had not yet determined whether it would cover any liability arising from the Etheridge suit. The letter concluded by stating:
Please be advised that if there is any judgment against the City of Grosse Pointe Park for eminent domain,  a discharge of any pollutants, or an intentional act, the Michigan Municipal Liability & Property Pool reserves the right not to indemnify Grosse Pointe Park for said damages. [Emphasis added.]
The Pool subsequently assigned an outside adjusting firm to monitor the Etheridge lawsuit. During the course of the Etheridge litigation, the Pool's adjuster  received copies of all pleadings and attended meetings with the litigants. The Pool also paid in-house sewage backup claims involving residences and businesses unrelated to the Etheridge suit while the Etheridge litigation was proceeding. After several facilitation sessions, in August 1997, the Etheridge plaintiffs agreed to settle with Grosse Pointe Park for $ 1.9 million. 6 
Before the Etheridge settlement was finalized, however, the Pool informed the city that the Pool's outside counsel did not believe that the Pool was obligated to indemnify the city given the policy's pollution exclusion clause. Subsequently, the Pool formally notified the city that coverage would be denied. Nevertheless, the city proceeded to approve the $ 1.9 million settlement with the Etheridge plaintiffs a few months later. 
The city then filed suit in the Wayne Circuit Court seeking a declaratory judgment that the Pool was obligated to indemnify the city for the Etheridge settlement. After lengthy discovery, both the Pool and the city filed cross-motions for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10). Ruling in favor of the city, the trial court held that the Pool was equitably estopped from denying coverage under the pollution exclusion clause because the Pool had paid prior backup claims made by Grosse Pointe Park residents. 7  
  In a two-to-one decision, the Court of Appeals reversed the trial court's holding  that the Pool was equitably estopped from invoking the pollution exclusion clause. 8  The Court of Appeals held that a question of fact existed with regard to the estoppel claim and therefore remanded the case to the trial court for further proceedings. It also held that the Pool's payment of prior backup claims was "extrinsic evidence" of ambiguity in the insurance policy and remanded the case to the trial court to determine "the parties' intent as to the exclusion's applicability . . . ." Judge O'Connell dissented, arguing that extrinsic evidence should not be considered because the insurance policy was clear and unambiguous. He further argued that equitable estoppel was not applicable because the Pool timely provided the city a reservation of rights letter. We granted the Pool's application for leave to appeal. 9 
  II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
A motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(10), which tests the factual support of a claim, is reviewed by this Court de novo. 10  Similarly, the interpretation of an insurance policy is also a question of law that is reviewed by this Court de novo. 11 
 III. ANALYSIS
A. IS SEWAGE A "POLLUTANT" UNDER THE INSURANCE POLICY'S POLLUTION EXCLUSION CLAUSE?
The insurance policy at issue provides:
Section V - General Exclusions
In addition to the specific exclusions in SECTION I - COVERAGES A - BODILY INJURY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE LIABILITY, B - PERSONAL AND ADVERTISING INJURY LIABILITY, C - MEDICAL PAYMENTS, D - PUBLIC OFFICIALS ERRORS AND OMISSIONS, AND E - AUTO, this coverage also does not apply to:
* * *
d. Bodily Injury or Property Damage arising out of the actual, alleged or threatened discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release or escape of pollutants:
* * *
Pollutants means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste. Waste includes materials to be recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed. [Emphasis added.]
 As this Court has previously held, "The principles of construction governing other contracts apply to insurance policies." 12   As such, the foremost duty of a court in construing an insurance policy is to determine the intent of the contracting parties. 13  In doing so, a  court must always begin with the actual language used by the parties in the insurance policy itself. 14  If the text of the insurance policy is clear and unambiguous, the contract must be enforced as written. 15  "An unambiguous contractual provision is reflective of the parties' intent as a matter of law." 16  
It is difficult to imagine an insurance policy that is clearer or more explicit than the one found in the present case. The pollution exclusion clause defines "pollutant" as "any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant . . . ." The word "contaminant," given its plain and ordinary meaning, 17  is "something that contaminates,  " and "contaminate" is defined as "to make impure or unsuitable by contact or mixture with something unclean, bad, etc.; pollute; taint . . . ." 18  It is undeniable that Fox Creek was "made impure" and "tainted" by the sewage that the city released. The record indicates that the sewage contained dirt, debris, garbage, condoms, feminine hygiene products, urine, feces, dishwater, toilet paper, cleaning fluids, and compounds containing E.coli. Therefore, because these "solid" and "liquid" materials are "contaminants," the sewage the city released is necessarily a "pollutant" under the plain terms of the insurance policy.
This conclusion is bolstered by the fact that the pollution exclusion clause also provides specific examples  of "pollutants," such as "smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste." Given the composition of the sewage described above, it is clear that most, if not all, of these specific examples of "pollutants" were found in Fox Creek. We conclude, therefore, that the sewage released by the city into Fox Creek is within the scope of the policy's pollution exclusion clause.
B. THE ROLE OF EXTRINSIC EVIDENCE IN ILLUMINATING A LATENT AMBIGUITY
The city argues that the word "pollutant" is latently ambiguous and that extrinsic evidence must be introduced to give the word the true meaning that the parties intended. According to the city, the Pool's payment of prior basement backup claims demonstrates that the parties intended the word "pollutant" to have a meaning different than the one used in the insurance policy itself.
We find the city's argument unpersuasive. The argument that the city is advancing is actually one of equitable estoppel, not contract interpretation. The city  is attempting to rely on the Pool's payment of similar basement sewer backup claims as a way to require the Pool to cover the present claim.  Accordingly, the city's argument sounds more in equity than in the law of contracts. For the reasons discussed in part III(C) of this opinion, we are unpersuaded by the city's equitable estoppel argument. Nonetheless, to the extent that the city argues that a latent ambiguity exits, we disagree.
There are generally two categories of ambiguity that may arise in a contract: patent and latent. 19  A patent ambiguity is one that is "apparent upon the face of the  instrument, arising by reason of inconsistency, obscurity or an inherent uncertainty of the language adopted, such that the effect of the words in the connection used is either to convey no definite meaning or a double one." 20  In contrast, a latent ambiguity "'arises not upon the words of the will, deed, or other instrument, as looked at in themselves, but upon those words when applied to the object or to the subject which they describe.'" 21 
By asserting the existence of a latent ambiguity, the city illustrates an inherent tension found in contract law. On the one hand, it is well-settled law that when a contract is clear and unambiguous on its face, a court will not consult extrinsic evidence and will enforce the contract as written. 22  On the other hand, a party generally is permitted to introduce extrinsic evidence to demonstrate the existence of a latent ambiguity--one that is not apparent on the face of the contract. 23 
 In balancing these two seemingly conflicting principles of contract law, a court must never cross the point at which the written contract is altered under the guise of contract interpretation. 24  Indeed, it is during litigation that a party's motivations are the most suspect and the party's incentives the greatest to attempt to achieve that which the party could not during the give-and-take of the contract negotiation process. As this Court stated in Nikkel, a "court may not read ambiguity into a policy where none exists." 25  Therefore, in  clarifying the proper role of extrinsic evidence in illuminating a latent ambiguity, it is helpful to turn to basic principles of contract law.
As stated, the primary goal of contract interpretation is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the contracting parties. 26  The law presumes that the contracting parties' intent is embodied in the actual words used in  the contract itself. 27  A rule to the contrary would reward imprecision in the drafting of contracts. More significant, it would create an incentive for an aggrieved party to enlist the judiciary in an attempt to achieve a benefit that the party itself was unable to secure in negotiating the original contract--a proposition this Court flatly rejected in Wilkie. 28  These principles require that, when a party asserts that a latent ambiguity exists, a court presume that the contracting parties' intent is manifested in the actual language used in the contract. The party alleging the existence of the latent ambiguity may rebut this presumption only by proving, through clear and convincing evidence, that such an ambiguity does indeed exist.
This Court emphasized these same bedrock principles of contract law in Quality Products, which held that contracting parties are free, with mutual assent, to modify a contract notwithstanding a written anti-modification or anti-waiver clause present in the original agreement. 29  We recognized that the anti-modification clause contained in the written contract was presumptive of the parties' intent as a matter of law, but also that "the parties possess, and never cease to possess, the freedom to contract even after the original contract has been executed." 30  We held, therefore, that contracting parties are always entitled mutually to modify the underlying contract, but the party  asserting that a modification has occurred must present clear and convincing evidence to that effect. 31 
Although Quality Products involved contract modification, not contract interpretation, the same core principles of contract law apply in the present case. It must be presumed that the city and the Pool intended the actual language that they used in the insurance policy. We  conclude, therefore, that the city, in asserting the existence of a latent ambiguity, bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that such an ambiguity actually exists. 32 
  The city has failed to satisfy that burden of proof. The reality is that none of the parties to this insurance contract asserts that the term "pollutant" contained in the exclusion clause means something different when city sewage is discharged into Fox Creek or when it backs up into individual Grosse Pointe Park residences. Indeed, the Pool has conceded that the source of the pollution in both cases is the same. 33  Thus, the record reflects no evidence that one party contends that "pollutant" means something different from how that term is defined in the policy.
That being the case, there is no "latent ambiguity" requiring the introduction of extrinsic evidence to show that "pollutant" means something other than how it is defined in the contract. Rather, the city is attempting to bootstrap its estoppel argument--that the Pool paid similar claims involving pollutants so it is precluded from denying indemnification on this claim--to manufacture a latent ambiguity claim. Such a tactic violates basic contract construction principles and should be rejected for that reason.
C. EQUITABLE ESTOPPEL
The city argues that, even if sewage is a "pollutant" under the policy's pollution exclusion clause, the Pool should nonetheless be equitably estopped from denying coverage. It asserts that the Pool's payment of prior basement backup claims and the Pool's involvement in monitoring the Etheridge litigation  led the city to believe that the Pool would indemnify any eventual settlement that was reached. According to the city, it would have altered its strategy  in the Etheridge litigation had it known that the Pool would not cover the settlement and, therefore, it was prejudiced by the Pool's actions. 
In general, "the principle of estoppel is an equitable defense that prevents one party to a contract from enforcing a specific provision contained in the contract." 34  Although equitable estoppel appears to be broad in theory, the doctrine is rather limited in practice. As then-Chief Justice Weaver stated in writing for the Court in Kirschner, "The application of . . . estoppel is limited, and, usually, the doctrine[] will not be applied to broaden the coverage of a policy to protect the insured against risks that were not included in the policy or that were expressly excluded from the policy." 35 
Indeed, the rule discussed in Kirschner is well established in Michigan law. In Ruddock, the beneficiary of a life insurance policy sought to estop the insurer from invoking the policy's "military service" exclusion clause as a basis for denying payment. This Court expressly rejected the beneficiary's equitable estoppel argument, holding that estoppel will not be applied to broaden coverage beyond the specific risks covered by the policy itself. This Court stated:
To apply the doctrine of estoppel and waiver here would make this contract of insurance cover a loss it never  covered by its terms, to create a liability not created by the contract and never assumed by the defendant under the terms of the policy. In other words, by invoking the doctrine of estoppel and waiver it is sought to bring into existence a contract not made by the parties, to create a liability contrary to the express provisions of the contract the parties did make.[36  ]
By asking this Court to hold that the Pool is equitably estopped from denying coverage for the Etheridge settlement, the city is essentially requesting this Court to ignore the policy's pollution exclusion clause that the Pool specifically invoked in its reservation of rights letter. To do so, however, would be to alter fundamentally the nature of the bargain struck between the city and the Pool and to protect the city "against risks that were . . . expressly excluded from the policy." 37  This Court explicitly rejected this argument in Ruddock and Kirschner. We do so again today. Equitable estoppel must not be applied to expand coverage beyond the scope originally contemplated by the parties in the insurance policy as written. A court must not bestow under the veil of equity that which the aggrieved party itself failed to achieve in negotiating the contract. 38  
   Because we believe that Kirschner and Ruddock are fatal to the city's estoppel claim, unlike Justice Cavanagh, we would not apply the test articulated in Morales. Nevertheless, to the extent that the city relies on the principles in Morales, its reliance is misplaced. In Morales, this Court applied a three-part test to determine whether equitable estoppel should apply: (1) the defendant's acts or representations induced the plaintiff's belief, (2) the plaintiff justifiably relied on its belief, and (3) the plaintiff was prejudiced as a result of its belief. 39  
Even assuming, arguendo, that the Pool's payment of prior basement backup claims and its involvement in monitoring the Etheridge suit led the city to hope that the settlement would be covered, and that the city actually relied on its mistaken belief, the city's equitable estoppel claim must fail because its reliance was not justifiable. Three weeks after the Etheridge suit was filed, the Pool sent the city a reservation of rights letter that specifically quoted the policy's pollution exclusion clause. The letter concluded by stating, "Please be advised that if there is any judgment against the City of Grosse Pointe Park for . . . a discharge of any pollutants, . . .  the Michigan Municipal Liability & Property Pool reserves the right not to indemnify Grosse Pointe Park for said damages." Moreover, the Pool frequently reminded the city during the Etheridge litigation that "serious coverage issues" remained. Despite all this, and after being notified by the Pool that coverage was formally denied, the city still proceeded to finalize the settlement with the Etheridge plaintiffs. 40  Any reliance  on the part of the city, therefore, was unjustified. 41  Because there was no justifiable reliance, we need not consider whether the city suffered any prejudice on the basis of its reliance; the city's estoppel claim fails as a matter of law.
IV. CONCLUSION
Sewage is clearly a "pollutant" under the plain language of the policy's pollution exclusion clause. Moreover, while extrinsic evidence may generally be introduced to demonstrate the existence of a latent ambiguity, we conclude that a court must presume that the contracting parties' intent is manifested in the actual language used in the contract itself and that the party alleging the existence of the latent ambiguity may rebut this presumption only by proving, through clear and convincing evidence, that such an ambiguity  does actually exist. The city has failed to meet this burden of proof. Moreover, any reliance on Morales is misplaced. Under Ruddock and Kirschner, the Pool is not equitably estopped from denying coverage because estoppel will not be applied to broaden coverage beyond the particular risks specifically covered by the policy itself. 
 The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and this matter is remanded to the trial court for entry of an order granting the Pool's motion for summary disposition.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Clifford W. Taylor
Stephen J. Markman 

 

