; MARKMAN  
Concur




YOUNG, J. (concurring).
I concur in the order reversing the judgment of the Court of Appeals and write solely to respond to the disturbing dissenting statement of Justice Kelly. This is a simple case that illustrates why judicial philosophy matters.
The insurance contract at issue disclaimed coverage for losses related to the insured home if it was "vacant and unoccupied beyond a period of 60 consecutive days." I wager that not one in a thousand native speakers of English would have difficulty in understanding this simple and straightforward contractual term. Notwithstanding, the premise of Justice  Kelly's dissent is that these contractual terms are ambiguous because they are not defined in the insurance contract. 1  Only in a "judicial world" would two commonplace terms like "vacant" and "unoccupied" be deemed ambiguous, and only those who share Justice Kelly's philosophy of contract construction would make contracts containing those terms essentially unenforceable.
Unfortunately, I believe that Justice Kelly's view of contract construction in this case foreshadows the future. I predict that we will see again the ascendency of a Michigan jurisprudence in which no contract will be enforced according to its plain meaning and the meaning given to such commonplace terms will be derived entirely from the imaginations of judges who share Justice Kelly's judicial philosophy.
MARKMAN, J. (concurring).
I concur in the decision to reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals. I respond separately only to address Justice Kelly's dissent. That dissent contends that our reliance on Rory v Continental Ins Co, 473 Mich 457; 703 N.W.2d 23 (2005), is "sadly misplaced" because defendant admits that the insurance policy at issue here does not define the word "vacant" or "unoccupied," and, thus, "did not rely on Rory in its most recent brief." To begin with, defendant did rely on Rory in its brief in support of its application for leave to appeal, 2  and defendant very likely did not rely on Rory in its "most recent brief," i.e., its supplemental brief, only because this Court specifically directed the parties to "not submit mere restatements of their application papers" in their supplemental briefs. 482 Mich 1018 (2008) (emphasis added). Further, although defendant acknowledges that the dispositive terms of the policy are not defined in the policy, contrary to the dissent's suggestion, this by no means constitutes a concession that these terms are "ambiguous." "As this Court has repeatedly stated, the fact that a contract does not define a relevant term does not render the contract ambiguous." Terrien v Zwit, 467 Mich 56, 76; 648 N.W.2d 602 (2002). "Rather, if a term is not defined in a contract, we will interpret such term in accordance with its 'commonly used meaning.'" Id. at 76-77, quoting Frankenmuth Mutual Ins Co v Masters, 460 Mich 105, 114; 595 N.W.2d 832 (1999). Finally, contrary to the dissent's intimation, a "term is not rendered ambiguous merely because resort to a dictionary reveals more than one definition." Lash v Traverse City, 479 Mich 180, 189; 735 N.W.2d 628 n 12 (2007). 3  "If that were the  test for determining whether a term is ambiguous, then virtually all contracts would be rife with ambiguity and, therefore, subject to what the dissent in 'words mean whatever I say they mean' fashion describes as 'judicial interpretation.'" Terrien, supra at 76. For these reasons, I fully share Justice Young's concerns about Justice Kelly's understanding of contract interpretation.
