, Jr.  
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
I dissent from the majority's denial of leave because the plaintiff's Notice of Intent (NOI) was defective. Accordingly, I would vacate the Court of Appeals majority decision for the reasons stated in Judge SAAD's dissenting opinion and, because current Michigan law so requires, remand this case for further proceedings consistent with Bush v Shabahang. 9  The majority's  failure to do so indicates its unwillingness  to apply the requirements of the NOI statute and Roberts v Mecosta Co Gen Hosp (After Remand). 10  
Plaintiff sent an NOI to multiple defendants, including doctors, nurses, professional corporations, and the hospital that treated plaintiff. Although the standard of care applicable to some of these defendants is not the same one applicable to others, in responding to the statutory duty to describe the standard of care applicable to the potential defendants, the plaintiff provided a laundry list of thirteen requirements, many of which failed to differentiate between the different standards of care owed by different defendants. Similarly, the plaintiff's articulation of the manner in which the standard of care was breached, and of the actions that should have been taken to comply with the standard of care, failed to differentiate between the defendants. Defendants Garden City Hospital and Dr. David Fertel moved for, inter alia, summary disposition on the basis of this alleged deficiency in the NOI. The trial court denied summary disposition, and the Court of Appeals affirmed, in a divided, published opinion. 11  
The goal of the NOI enterprise is to give defendants accused of medical malpractice reasonable notice of the nature of the claim and how the plaintiff contends they breached the relevant standard of care. This represents a significant legislative change in the medical malpractice regime, in which practitioners previously found out the nature of the claims lodged against them only after a complaint had been filed and during discovery. As such, the NOI procedure should not be diminished as the Court of Appeals has done here with the complicity of this Court. This Court of Appeals decision reintroduces the gamesmanship that the Legislature sought to end by introducing the NOI step in the litigation process.
As this Court stated in Roberts, the NOI must refer to "the particular standard of practice or care applicable to each of the various defendants." 12  The plaintiff is therefore required "to make good-faith averments that provide details that are responsive to the information sought by the statute and that are as particularized as is consistent with the early notice stage of the proceedings." 13  This Court's decision in Bush v Shabahang controls only the effect of a defective notice of intent and therefore leaves intact the Roberts requirements which describe how to determine whether an NOI is defective.
Here, the Court of Appeals majority ignored the Roberts requirements, merely stating that the instant NOI provided greater detail than the "tautologies" that the Roberts NOI stated. 14  Moreover, the Court of Appeals majority's statement that the plaintiffs need not "line particularized standards up to individual defendants," 15  contradicts the rule of law that this Court articulated in Roberts, requiring plaintiffs to include "the particular standard of practice or care applicable to each of the various  defendants." 16  This statement has been made in a published Court of Appeals decision that this Court is allowing to stand, even though it plainly contradicts Roberts. 17  In contrast, Judge SAAD's dissent correctly applied the Roberts standard:
[W]hile plaintiff set forth a recitation of facts about his hospitalization, he made no effort to provide notice of which standard of care applied to or was breached by each named health professional or facility, a list that includes medical practices and professionals of varying types, training, and specialties. 18 
Judge SAAD did not have the benefit of this Court's recent decision in Bush v Shabahang, which, as stated, details the effect of a deficient NOI. Under Bush, defendants are not necessarily entitled to summary disposition, as Judge SAAD's dissenting opinion would have held. Nevertheless, Judge SAAD applied Roberts correctly to conclude that the plaintiff filed a deficient NOI.
This denial order is another instance where members of the Court's new philosophical majority seem to retreat from its previously stated fidelity to stare decisis. 19  Since the shift in the Court's philosophical majority in January 2009, the new majority has pointedly sought out precedents only recently decided 20  and has failed to give effect to other recent precedents of  this Court. 21  Today, the Court again fails to give  effect to a recent precedent of this Court and, in so doing, fails to give meaning to the medical malpractice reforms enacted by our Legislature.
Consistent with the requirements of the NOI provisions of MCL 600.2912b and this Court's binding precedent in Roberts, I would vacate the Court of Appeals majority opinion for the reasons stated in Judge SAAD's dissent and remand this case to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with Bush.
CORRIGAN, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.

 

