; WEAVER  
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
The majority ignores the clear language of the REBA, MCL 339.2501 et seq., favoring instead an interpretation whose result the majority deems more palatable. The majority also ignores the historical evolution of the statute, which is not dispositive but is entirely consistent with the unambiguous language of the statute. I believe that the statute encompasses the brokerage of business opportunities that do not involve real estate transactions. Accordingly, I would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals. Because the majority concludes otherwise, I respectfully dissent.
Plaintiff maintains that transaction it allegedly contracted to perform, which did not involve real estate, is not covered by the REBA and thus plaintiff was not required to be licensed under that act as a precondition of bringing suit for breach of the alleged agreement. The majority contends that the issue in this case is whether the Legislature "intended" the definition of real estate broker to encompass the brokerage  of non-real estate transactions. Ante at 3. However, rather than seeking to divine a free floating legislative intent, I believe that the Court's task in this case is to determine whether the words actually used by the Legislature encompass the brokerage of business opportunities that do not involve real estate. 
Our obligation of giving effect to the intent of the Legislature begins by examining the language of a statute. The words of a statute provide the most reliable evidence of legislative intent.  Coleman v Gurwin, 443 Mich. 59, 65;  503 N.W.2d 435 (1993). If the language of the statute is clear, the Legislature must have intended the meaning expressed, and the statute is enforced as written.  Turner v Auto Club Ins Ass'n, 448 Mich. 22, 27; 528 N.W.2d 681 (1995). It is only in the face of an ambiguity that a court may properly look outside the words utilized in the statute to ascertain legislative intent.  Sun Valley Foods Co v Ward, 460 Mich. 230, 236; 596 N.W.2d 119 (1999). Finally, in construing a statute, we must give the words used by the Legislature their common, ordinary meaning. MCL 8.3a. 1  
 Over the past several years, a majority of this Court has consistently adhered to  the philosophy that the plain language of a statute should be applied without regard to the "legislative wisdom" of the outcome. This philosophy is grounded in the belief that separation of powers principles preclude the judiciary from engaging in judicial legislation or otherwise "saving"  the citizenry from the actions of its duly elected legislators. See  People v Borchard-Ruhland; 460 Mich. 278; 597 N.W.2d 1 (1999);  People v Lukity, 460 Mich. 484; 596 N.W.2d 607 (1999);  Perez v Keeler Brass Co, 461 Mich. 602; 608 N.W.2d 45 (2000);  People v Hermiz, 462 Mich. 71; 611 N.W.2d 783 (2000);  Robinson v Detroit, 462 Mich. 439; 613 N.W.2d 307 (2000);  Mudel v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, 462 Mich. 691; 614 N.W.2d 607 (2000);  Nawrocki v Macomb Co Rd Comm, 463 Mich. 143; 615 N.W.2d 702 (2000);  People v Glass, 464 Mich. 266; 627 N.W.2d 261 (2001);  Michigan United Conservation Clubs v Secretary of State, 464 Mich. 359;  630 N.W.2d 297 (2001);  Pohutski v City of Allen Park, 465 Mich. 675; 641 N.W.2d 219 (2002);  Robertson v DaimlerChrysler Corp, 465 Mich. 732; 641 N.W.2d 567 (2002);  People v Cornell, 466 Mich. 335; 646 N.W.2d 127 (2002);  Sington v Chrysler Corp, 467 Mich. 144; 648 N.W.2d 624 (2002);  Mack v Detroit, 467 Mich. 186; 649 N.W.2d 47 (2002);  Weakland v Toledo Engineering Co, Inc, 467 Mich. 344; 656 N.W.2d 175 (2003);  In re Certified Question (Kenneth Henes Special Projects Procurement v Continental Biomass Industries, Inc),  468 Mich. 109; 468 Mich. 109; 659 N.W.2d 597 (2003). I do not believe that the majority's opinion can be easily squared with the principles of statutory construction outlined in the previously cited cases.
A. The Clear Language of the Statute is not Limited to Real Estate Transactions
The statute at issue is contained in the Occupational Code. MCL 339.2501(d) defines "real estate broker" as follows:
 "Real estate broker" means an individual,  sole proprietorship, partnership, association, corporation, common law trust, or a combination of those entities who with intent to collect or receive a fee, compensation, or valuable consideration, sells or offers for sale, buys or offers to buy, provides or offers to provide market analyses, lists or offers or attempts to list, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange or mortgage of real estate, or negotiates for the construction of a building on real estate; who leases or offers or rents or offers for rent real estate or the improvements on the real estate for others, as a whole or partial vocation; who engages in property management as a whole or partial vocation; who sells or offers for sale, buys or offers to buy, leases or offers to lease, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of a business, business opportunity, or the goodwill of an existing business for others; or who, as owner or otherwise, engages in the sale of real estate as a principal vocation. [Emphasis added.]
The plain language of the statute defines a real estate broker as, among other things, one who "negotiates the purchase . . . of a business, business opportunity, or the goodwill of an existing business for others . . . ." There is no textual indication in the statute that brokering a "business," "business opportunity," or the "goodwill of an existing business" is limited to only those transactions involving real estate. To the contrary, the clear language of "business, business opportunity, or the goodwill of an existing business" encompasses the brokerage of transactions without regard to real estate. The majority does not discuss the plain meaning of the statutory language; rather, the majority's analysis sidesteps the plain meaning of the  words and proceeds directly to the use of a canon of statutory construction and other contextual tools to explain why the plain language could not possibly mean what it so obviously says.
 In fact, by its very definition, the term "goodwill" refutes any notion that real estate is the factor common to all the actions assigned to real estate brokers by the Legislature. Goodwill is an intangible asset defined as "the favor which the management of a business wins from the public" and "the fixed and favorable consideration of customers arising from established and well-conducted business." Black's Law Dictionary (5th ed).  2  Thus, contrary to the majority's assertions, goodwill has nothing to do with real estate; rather, it attaches only to an ongoing business concern. 3  The irreducible problem faced by the majority  is that it cannot fit this round peg into its square hole. That is, the majority cannot declare the term "goodwill" to mean "real estate" without completely emasculating the definition of "goodwill." The majority makes a conscientious effort to ignore the fact that the word "goodwill" is a legal term of art that is distinct from real estate or any other physical asset. 
  B. Misuse of Statutory Construction Canons
Of importance, I believe that the majority misuses canons of statutory construction to actually deprive the words of the statute their customary meaning. 4  This is contrary to the well-understood principle that statutory construction aids should not be utilized to create an ambiguity where one does not otherwise exist. See In re  Certified Question (Henes v Continental Biomass), supra. Under the doctrine of noscitur a sociis, "the meaning of questionable words and phrases in a statute may be ascertained by reference to the meaning of words or phrases associated with it." Black's Law Dictionary (5th ed) (emphasis added). United States Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia discussed the meaning of this rule by illustration: "If you tell me, 'I took the boat out on the bay,' I understand 'bay' to mean one thing; if you tell me, 'I  put the saddle on the bay,' I understand it to mean something else." A Matter of Interpretation, (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1997), p 26. Using Justice Scalia's example as a guide, it is clear that the common meaning of the terms "business, business opportunity, or the goodwill of an existing business" are not contextually altered by the rest of the language in the REBA. 
I offer the following as an example to illustrate the majority's abuse and misapplication of this canon of statutory construction. Suppose that a hypothetical statute were to preclude ownership of the following animals without a license:
Duck, Goose, Bittern, Swan, Heron
Presume that the word "bittern" had no commonly understood meaning that could be discerned by resort to a dictionary. In order to determine the meaning of the word, the doctrine of noscitur a sociis could be utilized to reasonably come to the conclusion that a bittern is a type of waterfowl. That is, where the meaning of the word is not apparent, the meaning could be ascertained by reference to the meaning of words associated with it.
Now suppose that the hypothetical example were altered slightly, and the statute listed these animals:
Duck, Goose, Pig, Swan, Heron
Unlike bittern, the word "pig" does have a fixed, commonly understood meaning, and it is not "waterfowl." 5   However, under the majority's analysis, the doctrine of noscitur a sociis could properly be used to come to the conclusion that a pig is a waterfowl (despite the clear, unambiguous meaning of pig), because all the surrounding terms were waterfowls. 6  
 Similarly, despite the clear and unambiguous meaning of "business, business opportunity, or the goodwill of an existing  business," the majority concludes that these words are limited to those involving "a real estate transaction." Ante at 10. By misuse of the rules of construction, I believe the majority is amending the statute in order to avoid giving meaning to the words the Legislature has employed because to do so would result in the enforcement of a policy the majority rejects as unsound. The doctrinal difference separating me from the majority is that I am satisfied with applying the plain meaning of the statutory words, whereas the majority is uncomfortable with a construction that results in licensed real estate brokers  being the only persons in Michigan authorized to buy and sell businesses for others for a fee. This is an admittedly odd result, but one of the Legislature's making. As my colleague Justice TAYLOR has observed elsewhere, I "take comfort in the fact that the Legislature is free to amend" this statute if it now considers that the statute no longer reflects a sound policy choice.  People v Hermiz, supra at 80 n 13. I fully agree with the proposition that "the Legislature should not have to suffer judicial interference with the choice made in its legislative product."  Id. at 81. Thus, in my view, it remains the duty of the Legislature, not this Court, to change the state's licensing policy.
C. The Historical Import of the Statutory Phrase
In addition to ignoring the most obvious, common meaning of the disputed statutory provisions, which as the primary consideration, resolves the question before the Court, the majority ignores the historical evolution of the statute and the distinct meaning given to the "business chance broker" provisions. While this history is by no means dispositive, REBA'S text being the most compelling basis for determining the intent of that statute, it does provide additional comfort that the construction I offer is sound.
In 1919, the Legislature enacted the brokers license act,  1919 PA 306, which was titled "An act to define, regulate, and license real estate brokers, real estate salesmen and business chance brokers and to provide a penalty for a violation of the provisions [of the act]."
 Section 2 of the brokers license act defined "business chance broker, " and provided in pertinent part:
A business chance broker within the meaning of this act is any person, firm, partnership association, copartnership or corporation, who for a compensation or valuable consideration sells or offers for sale, buys or offers to buy, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of a business, business opportunity, or the good will of an existing business for others as a whole or partial vocation. [ 1919 PA 306 (emphasis added). 7  ] 
In 1943, the "business chance broker" section was eliminated, and the provisions delineating the responsibilities of business chance brokers were transferred verbatim to the real estate broker licensing act. Thus, the statutory definition of real estate broker was expanded to include those activities previously assigned to business chance brokers. The formerly separate business chance broker provision incorporated  into the real estate broker provision is highlighted below:
A real estate broker within the meaning of this act is any person, firm, partnership association, copartnership or corporation, who with intent to collect or receive a fee, compensation or valuable consideration, sells or offers for sale, buys or offers to buy, appraises or offers to appraise, lists or offers or attempts to list, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange or mortgage of real estate, or negotiates for the construction of buildings thereon, or who leases or offers to lease or rents or offers for rent any real estate or the improvements thereon for others, as a whole or partial vocation,  or who sells or offers for sale, buys or offers to buy, leases or offers to lease, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of a business, business opportunity, or the good will of an existing business for others, or who, as owner or otherwise, engages in the sale of real estate as a principal vocation. [ 1943 PA 57.]
From these legislative actions, I conclude that the Legislature made a deliberate and conscious decision not to eliminate activities formerly performed by business chance brokers, but to reassign to real estate brokers those activities previously performed by business chance brokers. Therefore, an evaluation of those activities historically performed by business chance brokers is particularly instructive on understanding the definition of these activities reassigned to real estate brokers that are at issue in this case.
Before its statutory introduction in 1919, the term "business chance broker" did not exist in Michigan. The term and its function were entirely a creation of the Legislature. 8  While there are but a few cases addressing the "business chance broker," there is clear indication in our case law that the activities of a business chance broker were not limited to transactions involving real estate. 
  Hague v DeLong, 292 Mich. 262; 290 NW 403 (1940), involved the stock sale of a company. There, this Court held that a brokerage firm was precluded from collecting a commission on the sale of all the capital stock of a company because plaintiff was not licensed  as a business chance broker. 9  The issue dividing the evenly split Court in Hague was whether the agreement was for the mere sale of stock or for the "sale of a business" within the meaning of the act. The prevailing side held that the agreement was for the sale of the business and that the sale of stock was merely incidental. 10  The dissent concluded that the agreement was merely for  the sale of stock. The dissent acknowledged, however, that if the purpose of the stock transaction were the sale of the business, plaintiff would be precluded from recovery because he was not licensed as required by the act. 11  
Thus, in Hague, decided three years before the statutory transfer of the functions of business chance brokers, the activities of a business chance broker were unanimously determined to encompass efforts that did not involve real estate transactions--in that case, the sale of stock. The majority here not only ignores the plain meaning of the words, but also the historical meaning given to the business chance broker provisions. To the contrary, I believe that the clear language of the statute, in addition to the historical meaning given to "business chance brokers," militates  against a conclusion that the Legislature in 1943 intended that the transferred business chance broker duties became limited to only those transactions involving real estate. Thus, contrary to the majority's assertion that stockbrokers were not "intended to fall within REBA," ante at 11, the statutory text and historical construction of this language indicate that stockbrokers were in fact subject, as business chance brokers, under identical statutory language.
It is certainly within the Legislature's constitutional prerogative and authority to decide what activities require licensure. I tend to agree that the choices made by the Legislature in enacting legislation regulating business chance brokers, and subsequently real estate brokers, may make little sense in today's economy. However, I do not believe that this Court has the constitutional authority to "fix" the statute to better suit our modern economy according to our own policy assumptions. Rather, it is the responsibility of the Legislature to rescind or amend statutes that are no longer viable.
Under the clear language of the statute, supported by the historical interpretation and eventual transfer of the activities of the business chance broker into those assigned to real estate brokers, I believe that the statute encompasses the brokerage of business opportunities that do not involve real estate transactions. Therefore, the plaintiff was required to be a licensed real estate broker as a precondition to entering into the alleged contract and is now precluded by MCL 339.2512a from suing to enforce any such contract.
 Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion and would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
WEAVER, J. (dissenting).
I dissent from the majority for the reasons stated in parts A and C only of Justice Young's dissent.
Elizabeth A. Weaver 

 

