; MARKMAN (In Part)  
Concur




Young, C.J. (concurring).
There is no gainsaying that the dissent's demand that Judge James' pay be withheld has a strong populist appeal. She has, after all, been publicly accused of very serious offenses. I write to explain why this appeal should be resisted.
In this Court's history, a judge accused of wrongdoing has been suspended without pay prior to the completion of the Judicial Tenure Commission (JTC) adjudicative process only under a very rare set of circumstances — where the misconduct had already been conclusively established, rendering the JTC's determination of misconduct largely irrelevant.1  Here, the dissent would suspend the respondent without pay based on allegations, before her misconduct has been proven at a hearing. For the foregoing reasons, I believe that placing respondent on interim suspension without pay is inappropriate.2 
The dissent asserts that "the total amount of public funds respondent is alleged to have misappropriated . . . is $131,030." However troubling, these are allegations rather than established fact; moreover, the allegations are disputed by Judge James.3 
Because the allegations have not been tested and proven in a hearing, at this point it should not be assumed that the most serious allegations will be proved. Similarly, even if the lesser allegations are proved, it is not certain that the appropriate sanction would exceed the suspension from office that respondent will have already incurred by being placed on administrative leave as well as any sanction served in response to the JTC's petition to suspend.
 The dissent cites three justifications favoring suspending respondent without pay: (1) a "potentially diminished regard for the self-disciplinary processes of the judiciary[;]" (2) the diminished likelihood of recovering "misappropriated public funds" for the City of Inkster; and (3) the diminished likelihood of recovering the misappropriated funds to provide "adequate restitution" to crime victims.
First, the entire thrust of the dissent is that more "discipline" needs to be meted out to Judge James by this Court now before the charges leveled against her are even heard by the JTC. The rationale for the dissent falters because the dissenter seeks either to make respondent an example (to prevent other judges from engaging in the kind of peculation with which she is charged)4  or transform a disciplinary process into a restitution recovery mechanism. According to the dissent, the Court's failure to make this additional sanction will undermine regard for the judiciary and demonstrate that the Court is unconcerned about the seriousness of these charges. All of these concerns are without foundation or actually undermine important principles of due process that this Court ought always to vindicate.
In placing respondent on administrative leave earlier this year, this Court promptly responded to the results of the SCAO audit that showed some irregularities. The matter was then immediately turned over to the JTC for investigation. In so doing, this Court prevented any additional harm that the respondent might have caused by continuing to administer the 22nd District Court. Thus, suspension without pay is not related to the recovery of any funds that may have been misappropriated by Judge James prior to being placed on administrative leave. The dissenter does not dispute this fact, he merely ignores it because it undercuts his restitution argument.
Nor can it reasonably be said that this Court's failure to suspend respondent without pay does anything to diminish "the public regard for the self-disciplinary process." Withholding respondent's pay before completing the adjudicative process results in the very harm the dissent claims to fear — "diminished regard for the self-disciplinary processes of the judiciary." Indeed, where the material facts are in dispute, those concerned with the integrity of the judicial system and "the public regard for the self-disciplinary process" should insist upon permitting the JTC process to conclude before the imposition of the punishment the dissent favors. While a lynch mob is surely effective in dispensing its view of justice without benefit of a trial, the judicial system is designed to be a bulwark against this and other forms of "mob justice." Consistent with our commitment to having guilt determined after a trial, the Court's action today both protects the public and maintains the integrity of the self-disciplinary process. Moreover, by order issued today, this Court has expedited the JTC proceedings to ensure that resolution of this matter occurs as quickly as possible.
The dissent, while purporting to understand the principles of our judicial disciplinary system, fails utterly to apply them. This is best illustrated by the dissent's inexorable focus on the desire to secure  "restitution" — for the victims of crime and the citizens of Inkster. This restitutionary justification for withholding pay before a JTC adjudication is entirely without legal foundation in the judicial disciplinary system. As the dissent acknowledges, the purpose of judicial disciplinary proceedings "is not to impose punishment on the respondent judge, or to exact any civil recovery, but to protect the people from corruption and abuse on the part of those who wield judicial power."5  However, this is precisely what the dissent seeks to accomplish—to exact a civil recovery for judicial wrongdoing.6 
Significantly, and consistent with the principles stated above, Art 6 Sec 30 of our constitution makes no provision for restitution as a sanction, nor is such a sanction easily reconciled with those sanctions specifically enumerated. Consequently, it is not surprising that the JTC rules do not provide a mechanism for "restitution." Accordingly, the dissent's justification for suspending respondent without pay prior to the JTC process is premised on a reason that is inappropriate to the very purpose of judicial disciplinary proceedings. This is all made worse by the fact that the dissent exacts "restitution" before a determination of guilt.7 
This case has gathered a fair bit of public notoriety in the media. Regardless, the role of the courts — and the role of the JTC process — is to ensure the rule of law. Media coverage is not grounds to end run the JTC process. While "sentence first — verdict afterwards" might satisfy the Queen of Hearts,8  I believe it is inappropriate to suspend respondent without pay when the underlying claims of misconduct are contested. Doing so disserves any Court aspiring to follow the rule of law.
