, Jr.; Elizabeth A. Weaver; Stephen J. Markman  
Concur




YOUNG, J. (concurring).
I fully concur in the majority opinion. I write separately, however, to explain why I believe removal to be the appropriate sanction in this case.
The purpose of Judicial Tenure Commission proceedings is not the punishment of the judge, but to maintain the integrity of the judicial process and to protect the citizenry from corruption and abuse. As such, this Court's primary concern in determining the appropriate sanction is to restore and maintain the dignity and impartiality of the judiciary and to protect the public. 1  
After reviewing the evidence in this case, I believe that the evidence establishes respondent was intoxicated at the time of the collision. Respondent left the scene of the accident and constructed several inconsistent explanations in order to avoid criminal responsibility for his intoxicated driving. More egregious, respondent also lied under oath during the course of the Judicial Tenure Commission investigation, presumably in order to avoid judicial disciplinary consequences.
Our judicial system has long recognized the sanctity and importance of the oath. 2  An oath is a significant act, establishing that the oath taker promises to be truthful. As the "focal point of the administration of justice," 3  a judge is entrusted by the public and has the responsibility to seek truth and justice by evaluating the testimony given under oath. When a judge lies under oath, he or she has failed to internalize one of the central standards of justice and becomes unfit to sit in judgment of others.
Certainly, Judicial Tenure Commission proceedings are intended to be remedial, not penal. 4  The vast majority of misconduct found by the Judicial Tenure Commission is not fatal; rather, it reflects oversight or poor judgment on the part of a fallible human being who is a judge. However, some misconduct, such as lying under oath, goes to the very core of judicial duty and demonstrates the lack of character of such a person to be entrusted with judicial privilege.
 Where a respondent judge readily acknowledges his shortcomings and is completely honest and forthcoming during the course of the Judicial Tenure Commission investigation, I believe that the sanction correspondingly can be less severe. However, where a respondent is not repentant, but engages in deceitful behavior during the course of a Judicial Tenure Commission disciplinary investigation, the sanction must be measurably greater. Lying under oath, as the respondent has been adjudged to have done, makes him unfit for judicial office.
It is for these reasons that I support respondent's removal from office.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Clifford W. Taylor
Maura D. Corrigan
WEAVER, J. (concurring).
I agree that Judge Noecker should be removed from the bench and join parts I-VI of the majority opinion. The accident, Judge Noecker's conduct following the accident, and his attempts to deceive the public and the police with incredible explanations of the accident are clearly prejudicial to the administration of justice and undermine the public's trust and confidence in the judiciary. Therefore, removal is the appropriate discipline.
I also concur in the result that Judge Noecker should not be assessed costs, but for different reasons. Rather than rely on a lack of notice or standards as the reason not to assess costs, I would not assess costs because it appears to me that this Court has no constitutional authority to assess the judge for the costs of the proceedings.  Const 1963, art 6, § 30 provides that "the supreme court may censure, suspend with or without salary, retire or remove a judge . . . ." Nothing in this constitutional provision gives this Court any authority to discipline the judge by assessing the judge the costs of the Judicial Tenure Commission proceedings against him or her.
Elizabeth A. Weaver
MARKMAN, J. (concurring).
I concur with the results of the majority opinion, as well as with much of its analysis. Had I been a member of the Judicial Tenure Commission (JTC), I might possibly have reached a different conclusion in terms of an appropriate sanction, for there is much with which I agree in the dissenting opinion. In particular, I agree with the dissenting opinion that more egregious behavior on the part of judges has, in the past, been met with less sanction than permanent removal. Post at 1. Further, I believe that the thirty-five years of honorable public service on the respondent's part deserve more consideration in the formulation of a sanction than, to my eye, has been given here.
Nonetheless, I concur with the majority opinion because, as it correctly notes, "'our power of review de novo does not prevent us from according proper deference'" to the processes of the JTC. Ante at 10 (citation omitted). While the majority emphasizes the deference due the "'master's ability to observe the witnesses' demeanor and comment on their credibility,'" 1  id., I would also emphasize the deference due the commission in its recommendation of a sanction. In In re Brown, 461 Mich. 1291; 625 N.W.2d 744 (2000), this Court directed the commission to more clearly articulate its standards in determining an appropriate judicial sanction, and we set forth a number of non-exclusive factors to be considered in this process. We stated in this regard:
 As a constitutionally created state agency charged with making recommendations to this Court concerning matters of judicial discipline, the JTC is entitled, on the basis of its expertise, to deference both with respect to its findings of fact and its recommendations of sanction. However, such deference cannot be a matter of blind faith, but rather is a function of the JTC adequately articulating the bases for its findings and demonstrating that there is a reasonable relationship between such findings and the recommended discipline.
* * *
. . . Where standards of this sort have been promulgated and reasonably applied to individual cases, this Court owes considerable deference to the JTC. [461 Mich. at 1292, 1293]
The commission here, in my judgment, has conscientiously evaluated the factors set forth in Brown, as well as additional factors, and has "adequately articulated the bases for its findings." Although personal consideration of these factors might have led me in the direction of the sanction set forth in the dissenting opinion, I cannot say that there is no "reasonable relationship between [the commission's] findings and the recommended discipline." Rather, I believe that the commission has identified such a relationship and therefore is entitled to deference by this Court.
It was proper for this Court to promulgate the Brown factors so that we could derive the "additional information necessary to perform [our] constitutional function of judicial discipline under Const 1963, art 6, § 30(2)." Brown, supra at 1291. Having promulgated these factors, and the commission having reasonably considered them, "proper deference" is now required on our part. While such deference is that which is owed to any executive or administrative agency, the constitutional status of the commission, Const 1963, art 6, § 30, underscores the necessity of such deference in matters of judicial discipline. On the basis of such deference, I concur with the conclusions of the majority opinion.
Stephen J. Markman
