ing).
I join in parts V(A) and (C) of Justice Markman's opinion. Like Justice Markman and the Judicial Tenure Commission (JTC), I conclude that respondent lied during the JTC proceedings and that this misconduct alone provides sufficient basis for removing him from office. 1  I write separately because I decline to address whether the JTC has the authority to determine if respondent vacated his office in violation of Const 1963, art 6, § 20 during the course of judicial disciplinary proceedings because respondent admitted that he changed his primary residence from the first to the second election division from August 2005 to February 2008. Given respondent's admission that he  moved outside his election division, 2  I believe that a formal determination of the JTC's power to decide such a question independent of respondent's admission is unnecessary in this case and do not reach a conclusion in the question debated by Justices Markman and Weaver in their respective opinions.
A. Respondent lied under oath
I fully agree with Justice Markman's analysis of the record in parts V(A) and (C) regarding respondent's untruthful testimony. What is startling is that the majority accepts without question respondent's proffered justification for vacating his office--that respondent "thought he could live in [the second election] division as long as he was not running for re-election." 3  Were this justification true, one would have expected respondent to live openly and notoriously at his legal residence, wherever that residence happened to be located within the 63rd District. However, review of the record reveals quite the opposite--respondent's actions during the relevant period were completely inconsistent with one who honestly believed that he could freely live outside his election territory.
Respondent acknowledged that he moved his legal  residence out of the 1st election division in 2005. Significantly, respondent acknowledged that he knew that he was required by law to change his address after he moved. However, respondent never changed the address on his driver's license to reflect his move to the  second election division. 4  Additionally, despite acknowledging that he was legally required to do so, respondent never changed his voter registration information from the first to the second election division. In fact, respondent fraudulently continued to vote as though he still lived in the 1st election division. 5  
Moreover, respondent continued to list his 1st election division address as his "residential address" on his 2007 application to carry a concealed weapon (CCW). 6  This latter act is particularly egregious because the CCW application is an affidavit that states:
Read the following statements and, if you agree, sign below at the time of submission with the clerk.
 * * *
I understand that this application is executed under oath and swear or affirm under penalty of law that the above answers are true and correct to the best of my knowledge. I understand that intentionally making a false statement is a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than 4 years or a fine of not more than $ 2500, or both.
Consequently, by signing this application with the incorrect address of residence, respondent again lied under oath. Despite this, respondent's defense is that he did not read the application before signing it. This has never been a valid defense to false swearing on a document requiring an attestation of truthfulness. 7  The majority's acceptance of respondent's excuse is as shameful as respondent's attempt to minimize the consequence of his dishonesty. We judges demand more of ordinary citizens who appear before us in court. Thus, it is hard to understand the "free pass" the majority has given a fellow member of the judiciary who ought to be held to at least the standard of honesty we require of others.
Respondent's intentional violation of the laws governing voting, driver's licenses, and CCW licensing are independently troubling, not inadvertent, and form a pattern of intentional misdirection. If respondent truly believed that he was free to live in the second election division, then  why would he take such great pains to make it appear as though his legal residence was still in the 1st election division? I think the answer is clear.  Respondent took pains to conceal his true residence because he had reason to know that he was not living in the proper election division. After respondent filed a homestead exemption for his second election division home in 2005, it became increasingly impossible for respondent to maintain the lie regarding his legal residence being outside his election division.
Additionally, the testimony indicated that between 2000 and the end of 2004 respondent provided court staff with a telephone number to his property in the second election division for the court's after-hour duty log. 8  However, beginning in January 2005, respondent provided a telephone number to his property in the 1st election division, but the testimony indicated that calls placed to this number were forwarded to his address in the second election division. Beginning in January 2006, testimony indicated that the after-hours telephone number was changed to a telephone number in the second election division because respondent "was having problems with his fax machine and he thought that the call forwarding from the other phone was the problem with the fax machine." However, in July 2006, respondent again reverted to providing court staff with a 1st election division telephone number that was again forwarded to his telephone in the 2nd election division. While the testimony indicated that respondent provided the telephone numbers to the court administrator, at the hearing respondent claimed that the telephone numbers "didn't come from [him]" and claimed to be unable to recognize his own telephone number, despite the fact that the telephone number was provided to the court administrator a mere eighteen months before the  hearing. 9  When asked if he had ever had calls forwarded from one address to another, respondent evasively answered "no, not that I know of." I reject the ridiculous notion that respondent could not recognize his own telephone number and did not "know" whether he had forwarded telephone calls from one property to the other. More fundamentally, if respondent truly believed that he was free to live legally in the second election division and maintain his judicial office, there would have been no need to forward his telephone calls at all. Thus, I completely agree with Justice Markman that the record establishes that respondent repeatedly lied under oath. The majority incredulously claims that "respondent did nothing to hide the fact" that respondent resided in his second election division home from 2005; however, the plain facts contained in the record indicate otherwise. 10  
   B. Sanction
Having determined that the record fully supports that respondent lied under oath, I believe that the only appropriate sanction is removal from office. 11  As I noted in In re Noecker: 12 
The purpose of Judicial Tenure Commission proceedings is not the punishment of the judge, but to maintain the integrity of the judicial process and to protect the citizenry from corruption and abuse. As such, this Court's primary concern in determining the appropriate sanction is to restore and maintain the dignity and impartiality of the judiciary and to protect the public.
* * *
Our judicial system has long recognized the sanctity and importance of the oath. An oath is a significant act, establishing that the oath taker promises to be truthful. As  the "focal point of the administration of justice," a judge is entrusted by the public and has the responsibility to seek truth and justice by evaluating the testimony given under oath. When a judge lies under oath, he or she has failed to internalize one of the central standards of justice and becomes unfit to sit in judgment of others. . . . [S]ome misconduct, such as lying under oath, goes to the very core of judicial duty and demonstrates the lack of character of such a person to be entrusted with judicial privilege. 13 
For these reasons, I would adopt the recommendation of the JTC and remove respondent from office.
Robert P. Young, Jr.

 

