
I write in concurrence because of the extraordinary character of the dissent.  While I do not doubt the sincerity of my dissenting colleague's passionate feelings about this matter, I do believe that her statement, if left unanswered, is calculated to, and will, mislead the public about the nature of the judicial discipline process generally and the seriousness with which this Court addressed the concerns of judicial misconduct raised in this case.
Contrary to what some members of the public may believe, the Michigan Constitution places in the hands of the Judicial Tenure Commission (JTC) the initial responsibility for investigating allegations of judicial misconduct and for recommending to this Court a proposed sanction when misconduct has been established. Then, and only then, is this Court authorized to act by accepting, rejecting, or modifying the JTC recommendation.
 As happened in this case, in some cases of alleged judicial misconduct, rather than conducting a contested hearing to establish the misconduct, the accused judge and the JTC will negotiate a "consent agreement," which is akin to a plea agreement in the criminal system. Typically, in these consent agreements, the accused judge admits to some form of unethical conduct in exchange for a negotiated and specific sanction. This Court is not bound by such a consent agreement, but our rules permit them and the parties at the JTC level negotiate them with the knowledge that, until this Court makes a final determination, these negotiated consent agreements will remain confidential. This is in recognition that no trial on the merits of the accusations has occurred. Also, because no trial has occurred, our rules permit an accused judge to withdraw from a consent agreement and proceed to trial if this Court declines to accept the consent agreement.
As in this case, when this Court renders a final determination, it publishes its decision and the sanction it has imposed.
Until this case, our dissenting colleague has respected the confidentiality of this process and has seen no need to publish to the world her final judgment on the matter until the normal process had concluded. Consequently, I am shocked that our colleague has suggested that her fellow justices have engaged in a "cover up" when our suppression orders were necessary to prevent her from issuing a public denunciation of Judge Gilbert before the process outlined in our rules had been completed.
Even a judge who has failed to live up to the responsibilities of office is entitled to a fair process. Justice Weaver stands alone in her position that she is entitled to publish her conclusions in a case before the Court itself has acted. In Michigan, an accused still has a right to a trial before an execution, not the other way around.
Corrigan, C.J., Cavanagh, Kelly, Taylor, and Markman, JJ., join in the concurrence of Young, J.  
