ing).
I dissent and would deny leave to appeal, because Miller v Chapman Contracting, 477 Mich 102; 730 N.W.2d 462 (2007), is applicable, correct, and was decided only 28 months ago. The majority, however, believes it appropriate to alert the parties to "be prepared to address" whether Miller was correctly decided, even though the  appellants did not ask this Court to reconsider Miller. While the majority is within its rights to reconsider Miller, doing so is incompatible with the  respect for judicial restraint and stare decisis that members of the majority professed for over a decade.
The appellants have not asked this Court to reconsider Miller, nor have the parties briefed the issue whether Miller was correctly decided. Nevertheless, the majority has injected this issue into the case because it disagrees with how this Court decided Miller approximately 28 months ago. Again, the majority has a right to revisit any decision it wishes, but its members have previously argued that doing so was a form of "activism." Justice Cavanagh has decried the practice of "directing parties to address issues not initially raised or briefed by the parties in their application for leave to appeal" as a "distinct typeof activist behavior." Mack v Detroit, 467 Mich 186, 224; 649 N.W.2d 47 n 9 (2002) (Cavanagh, J., dissenting).
Ten years ago, Justice Cavanagh, joined by then Justice Kelly, dissented from an order that asked the parties to address whether the Court should exercise its authority to reconsider previously decided cases. Cooper v Wade, 461 Mich 1201; 597 N.W.2d 837 (1999). He explained that "the fact that a majority would feel that the proper exercise of its duties mandates that [it] revisit every decision of this Court that [it] might question and have the power to reach . . . is a troubling thought." Id. at 1203 (Cavanagh, J., dissenting). Instead, he counseled "a necessary measure of judicial restraint." Id.
In his concurring statement, Justice Cavanagh attempts to distinguish the instant case from Cooper v Wade by claiming that "the current order is not part of a long string of cases that, when viewed as a collective, suggest a pattern of exercising the power to overturn numerous longstanding precedents in a manner that lacks judicial restraint" But this claim rings hollow when one member of this Court, our Chief Justice, has claimed that she would "undo a great deal of the damage that the Republican court has done." Brian Dickerson, GOP Justices Gird for Gang of 3 1/2, Detroit Free Press, January 11, 2009, at 1B. Indeed, this statement, when viewed in light of actions the new philosophical majority has already taken in effectively overturning the established precedent of this Court, 4  suggests that there has been the very "pattern of exercising  power to overturn numerous longstanding precedents in a manner that lacks judicial restraint" that Justice Cavanagh decried in the Court's former philosophical majority.
 Justice Cavanagh also claims that the order in the instant case "has merely raised the question" whether Miller was correctly decided. As he well knows, the Court will not be "merely" discussing whether Miller was correctly decided; that discussion has a point, and that point can only be to reconsider Miller.
Because judicial restraint and principle should not depend on whether one is in the majority, I respectfully dissent. 5  However, regarding the merits, I request that the parties address the relevance of textual differences between MCR 2.118(D) and FR Civ P 15(c)(1)(C).

 

