, Jr.  
Concur




Young, C.J. (concurring).
I decline to answer the questions certified by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan because I believe that Michigan Court of Appeals' caselaw1  has correctly construed MCL 500.3105(4) to require that an injured person subjectively intend the injury, not merely the act, in order for an insurer to be relieved of its obligation to pay personal protection insurance benefits. MCL 500.3105(4) states:
 Bodily injury is accidental as to a person claiming personal protection insurance benefits unless suffered intentionally by the injured person or caused intentionally by the claimant. Even though a person knows that bodily injury is substantially certain to be caused by his act or omission, he does not cause or suffer injury intentionally if he acts or refrains from acting for the purpose of averting injury to property or to any person including himself.
The first sentence of the statutory provision clearly indicates that bodily injury is accidental "unless suffered intentionally by the injured person...." It is the injury that must be intentional, as the first sentence of the statute simply does not contemplate the injury-causing act or omission. The second sentence of the statutory provision is not an exception to the broad proclamation contained in the first sentence, but merely describes an injury that continues to be "accidental" under the No-Fault Act. Where a "person knows" that bodily injury is "substantially certain" to be caused by his actions, but he acts "for the purpose of averting injury to property or to any person," the resulting injury is not intentional.2 
I see no basis to conclude that an injury is suffered intentionally, and that personal protection insurance benefits may be denied, where a person engages in an intentional act where injury is substantially certain to occur. Because I believe that Michigan Court of Appeals' caselaw accurately interprets the statutory provision, I respectfully decline to answer the certified questions.
Finally, I wish to respond to the dissenting Justice's suggestion that the decision from the federal district court judge construing this statute "will effectively become the law of this state." I concede that the federal judge has indicated that he might be inclined to ignore our published Court of Appeals precedent. However, contrary to the dissent's assertion, if the federal district court chooses to ignore the accurate interpretation of the statutory provision provided by Michigan Court of Appeals caselaw, such a decision will affect only the parties in that federal case. Until this Court overrules or modifies the relevant Court of Appeals caselaw, all Michigan courts are obligated to follow it. See MCR 7.215(C) and (J)(1).
This legal fact alone explains why this Court should not expend its limited resources in an attempt to accommodate a federal court judge - even one that indicates that he might be unwilling to follow caselaw that is binding on every court in Michigan.
