; MARKMAN; CAVANAGH (In Part)  
Concur




YOUNG, J. (concurring).
I concur in the decision to reverse but write to express my own dismay at the tone and conclusion reached by Justice Kelly. She condemns as "manifestly unjust" the result reached by the majority. She does so based entirely on her understandable sympathy with the plaintiff, who was obviously misled by the Secretary of State's office. Justice Kelly does not explain how the Secretary of State has the power to alter the unambiguous statutory deadline, nor does she address the authority of the courts to revise such a statute. 1  
Contrary to her position today, not long ago, Justice Kelly, writing for the Court in Stokes v Millen Roofing Co, 2  held:
 In its bench ruling granting equitable relief to Millen, the trial court stated that a court in equity may provide for nonlegal, equitable remedies to avoid unduly harsh legal doctrines. Its analysis is invalid because, in this case, equity is invoked to avoid application of a statute. Courts must be careful not to usurp the Legislative role under the guise of equity because a statutory penalty is expressly punitive. As the Court of Appeals stated:
"Regardless of how unjust the statutory penalty might seem to this Court, it is not our place to create an equitable remedy for a hardship created by an unambiguous, validly enacted, legislative decree."
I agree with Justice Kelly's statement of legal principles in Stokes. Now, in this case, it appears that Justice Kelly has abandoned her Stokes opinion and the very principles she propounded there.
It appears that Justice Kelly's adherence to precedent is "flexible" such that she is willing to ignore even her own decisions  when she finds them inconvenient. I am, as is the majority, prepared to follow Stokes -- even if its author abandons it.
TAYLOR, C.J., and CORRIGAN and MARKMAN, JJ., join the statement of YOUNG, J.
MARKMAN, J. (concurring).
With all respect to Justice Kelly, it is not "manifestly unjust" for this Court to conclude that the plain words of a law enacted by the Legislature cannot be modified by a clerk in the Secretary of State's office (or indeed by the Secretary of State herself). In this case, the law requires that a candidate, seeking to run for a judgeship in the 23rd Judicial Circuit obtain 200 to 400 petition signatures. MCL 168.544f. 3  By the filing deadline, plaintiff, acting upon the guidance of the Secretary of State's office, had obtained only 158 signatures. Although it is unfortunate that plaintiff received incorrect guidance, such guidance cannot alter the law of this state. Thus, the trial court erred in affording plaintiff an opportunity beyond the filing deadline to obtain additional signatures. There cannot be as many laws as there are public servants who dispense guidance or advice on the meaning of the law. Rather, such guidance or advice must always be understood as subordinate to the law actually enacted by the elected representatives of the people.
TAYLOR, C.J., and CORRIGAN and YOUNG, JJ., join the statement of MARKMAN, J.
