, Jr.  
Dissent




Young, C.J. (dissenting).
While I agree with the majority's analysis of our state's intestacy laws, I respectfully dissent and would decline to answer the certified question. I do so for two reasons.
First, I continue to believe that this Court lacks the constitutional authority to issue advisory opinions1  other than as described in article 3, § 8 of Michigan's 1963 Constitution.2  My position regarding the  Court's constitutional authority did not prevail, and I accept that the Court has determined otherwise.3  However, my constitutional reservation counsels that this Court  should accept and answer certified questions from the federal courts sparingly and only when the Michigan legal issue is a debatable one and pivotal to the federal case that prompted the request for the certified question. It is this prudential concern that I now address.
I concede that the question whether the children at issue are "heirs" of their deceased father under Michigan intestacy law is determinative to the federal case.4  Under federal law, the children are entitled to social security survivors' benefits if the children can take as heirs from their father under Michigan intestacy law, MCL 700.2101 et seq.5  The children's entitlement to take as heirs is provided by MCL 700.2103, under which it must be shown that the children are both their father's descendants6  and that they survived their father.7  However, as the majority opinion conclusively establishes, the question whether the children may be considered to have been alive at the time of their father's death is not debatable under our intestacy laws—a point plaintiff's counsel conceded at oral argument.  The only way that the children may be deemed to have survived their father is if they were "in gestation" at the time of their father's death.8  Thus, the only way plaintiff could prevail is if this Court failed to give the word "gestation" its plain and ordinary meaning. Indeed, plaintiff's counsel urged that these children could be deemed "in gestation" by construing gestation as a "process" that included hormone therapy administered to the mother before the father's death as well as in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer that occurred after the father's death. This, of course, is no more than a call for construction by eisegesis and would require an entirely apocryphal interpretation of a common term: gestation.
I believe that no serious debate regarding the plain language of the relevant laws  exists and that no reasonable construction of our laws would permit the children to take as heirs of their deceased father under our intestacy provisions.9  Indeed, both the Social Security  Administration and the administrative law judge who reviewed the case applied the common meaning of gestation and denied survivor's benefits to the children because, as the Social Security Administration phrased it, the children "were not in gestation at the time of Mr. Mattison['s] death." That being the case, the federal court should have been easily able to determine for itself the very answer to its certified question that the majority has provided. As such, this would appear to be the textbook example of the kind of certified question that this Court ought to have exercised its discretion and declined to answer.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent and would decline to answer the certified question.
Robert P. Young, Jr.

 

