).
I join and fully concur in the admirably concise majority opinion. I write separately to provide the rationale and analysis for my conclusion that 2000 PA 381 is exempt from the referendum power of art 2, § 9 of our 1963 state constitution and why I take exception to the constitutional exegesis offered by my dissenting colleagues.
I. THE QUESTION BEFORE THE COURT
There is no gainsaying that 2000 PA 381 has become the focus of a heated debate among various segments of Michigan's citizens; Justice Cavanagh's dissent is generous in providing his own extensive personal views on the public controversy surrounding 2000 PA 381. However important, this political issue-the merits or demerits of the underlying act-is not  before this Court. The sole question we are to decide in this case is a legal one: Is 2000 PA 381 subject to the referral process under the provisions of art 2, § 9? If it is, 2000 PA 381 will not become effective until the next general election-if a majority of the voters then approve it. Const 1963, art 2, § 9; MCL 168.477(2) . If the stated limitation on the people's referral power contained in art 2, § 9 applies, the act is not subject to the referendum process at all.
II. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
In December 2000, the Legislature enacted 2000 PA 381, MCL 28.421 et seq., which modifies the standards for the issuance of concealed weapons permits. The effective date of the law is July 1, 2001. 
Intervening defendant is a group that filed with defendants Secretary of State and Board of State Canvassers a petition, signed by approximately 260,000 Michigan voters, 1  requesting a referendum on the  new law. Although the Board of Canvassers initially, by a two-to-two vote, declined to certify the petition on the basis that the law may not be subject to referendum, on May 21, 2001, the board certified the petition. Approximately 230,000 valid signatures supported  the petition (80,000 more than the number required). 2 
On March 23, 2001, plaintiffs-two organizations that lobbied for the law and three individuals who want to apply for concealed weapons permits-filed a complaint for mandamus in the Court of Appeals, seeking to prevent the Board of State Canvassers from proceeding with the canvass of the petitions. Plaintiffs argued that 2000 PA 381 is not subject to referendum because it contains an appropriation to a state institution, the Department of State Police, and the Michigan Constitution provides that "the power of referendum does not extend to acts making appropriations for state institutions . . . ." Const 1963, art 2, § 9. 
As stated, plaintiffs contended that two provisions in 2000 PA 381 make appropriations for a state institution within the meaning of art 9, § 2. The first, § 5v of the act, (1) creates a concealed weapon enforcement fund in the state treasury, (2) allows the state treasurer to receive money or other assets from any source for deposit into the fund and to direct the investment of the fund, (3) provides that money in the fund at the close of the fiscal year shall remain in the fund and not lapse to the general fund, and (4) directs the Department of State Police to expend money from the enforcement fund only to provide training to law enforcement personnel in connection  with the act. 3  The second, § 5w(1) of the act, provides that "one million dollars is appropriated from the general fund to the department of state police for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2001" for such activities as distributing free safety devices to the public and creating and maintaining a database of individuals applying for a concealed weapons license. 4 
 Plaintiffs further argued that defendants Secretary of State and the Board of Canvassers had a threshold duty to determine whether the petition on its face meets the constitutional prerequisites for acceptance and canvassing, and that, until this determination was made, canvassing should cease.
 In an order dated April 9, 2001, the Court of Appeals granted People Who Care About Kids permission to intervene and accepted the amicus curiae brief of the Michigan Association of Chiefs of Police. The panel then dismissed plaintiffs' complaint for mandamus, holding-on a ground not raised by the parties-that

the matter is not ripe for this Court's consideration. The Board of State Canvassers has not completed its canvass of the referendum petitions. MCL 168.479 5 
 On plaintiffs' application for leave to appeal, this Court remanded the matter to the Court of Appeals for plenary consideration of the complaint for mandamus. 6  463 Mich. 1007, 1008-1009, 625 N.W.2d 377 (2001). 
On remand, the Court of Appeals denied plaintiffs' request for mandamus, holding that " 2000 PA 381 is not an act making appropriations for state institutions as contemplated by Const 1963, art 2, § 9," and that it therefore was subject to referendum. 246 Mich. App. 82; 630 N.W.2d 376 (2001). 
 We granted plaintiffs' application for leave to appeal from the decision of the Court of Appeals. 464 Mich. 855 (2001). 7 
III. CONTROLLING RULES OF CONSTITUTIONAL CONSTRUCTION
Of preeminent importance in addressing the matter at hand is an understanding of the particularized rules of textual construction that apply to constitutional provisions. "Each provision of a State Constitution is the direct word of the people of the State, not that of the scriveners thereof," Lockwood v Nims, 357 Mich. 517, 565; 98 N.W.2d 753 (1959) (BLACK, J., concurring), and therefore "we must never forget that it is a Constitution we are expounding," id., quoting McCulloch v Maryland, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat) 316, 407; 4 L. Ed. 579 (1819).
Our primary goal in construing a constitutional provision-in marked contrast to a statute or other texts-is to give effect to the intent of the people of the state of Michigan who ratified the constitution, by applying the rule of "common understanding." Recently, in People v Bulger, 462 Mich. 495, 507; 614 N.W.2d 103 (2000), we  explained the rule of common understanding:

In construing our constitution, this Court's object is to give effect to the intent of the people adopting it. . . . "Hence, the primary source for ascertaining its meaning is to examine its plain meaning as understood by its ratifiers at the time of its adoption." [Citations omitted; emphasis supplied.]
 I agree with Justice Cavanagh's reliance on Justice COOLEY's explanation of the rule of "common understanding": 


A constitution is made for the people and by the people. The interpretation that should be given it is that which reasonable minds, the great mass of the people themselves, would give it. "For as the Constitution does not derive its force from the convention which framed, but from the people who ratified it, the intent to be arrived at is that of the people, and it is not to be supposed that they have looked for any dark or abstruse meaning in the words employed, but rather that they have accepted them in the sense most obvious to the common understanding, and ratified the instrument in the belief that that was the sense designed to be conveyed." [ Federated Publications, Inc v Michigan State Univ Bd of Trustees, 460 Mich. 75, 85; 594 N.W.2d 491 (1999), quoting 1 Cooley, Constitutional Limitations (6th ed), p 81 (emphasis added).]
See also American Axle & Mfg, Inc v Hamtramck, 461 Mich. 352, 362; 604 N.W.2d 330 (2000); State Highway Commission v Vanderkloot, 392 Mich. 159, 179; 220 N.W.2d 416 (1974); Traverse City Sch Dist v Attorney General, 384 Mich. 390, 405; 185 N.W.2d 9 (1971) ;  Michigan Farm Bureau v Secretary of State, 379 Mich. 387, 391; 151 N.W.2d 797 (1967); Lockwood, 357 Mich. at 569. 
As expounded by Justice COOLEY and this Court, the "common understanding" principle of construction is essentially a search for the original meaning attributed to the words of the constitution by those who ratified it. This rule of construction acknowledges the possibility that a provision of the constitution may rationally bear multiple meanings, but the rule is concerned with ascertaining and giving effect only to the construction, consistent with the language, that the  ratifiers intended. Thus, our task is not to impose on the constitutional text at issue here the meaning we as judges would prefer, or even the meaning the people of Michigan today would prefer, but to search for contextual clues about what meaning the people who ratified the text in 1963 gave to it.
Our analysis, of course, must begin with an examination of the precise language used in art 2, § 9 of our 1963 Constitution. See American Axle, 461 Mich. at 362. Art 2, § 9 provides, in relevant part:

The people reserve to themselves the power to propose laws and to enact and reject laws, called the initiative, and the power to approve or reject laws enacted by the legislature, called the referendum. The power of initiative extends only to laws which the legislature may enact under this constitution. The power of referendum does not extend to acts making appropriations for state institutions or to meet deficiencies in state funds and must be invoked in the manner prescribed by law within 90 days following the final adjournment of the legislative session at which the law was enacted. To invoke the initiative or referendum, petitions signed by a number of registered electors, not less than eight percent for initiative and five percent for referendum of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor at the last preceding general election at  which a governor was elected shall be required.
No law as to which the power of referendum properly has been invoked shall be effective thereafter unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at the next general election. [Emphasis supplied.]
As is apparent from the text of art 2, § 9, the people's right of referral is expressly limited. The limitation relevant here is the first: There is no right of referral for "acts making appropriations for state institutions." There is no dispute here that the Department of State Police is a "state institution" within the  meaning of art 2, § 9. Nor is there any dispute that 2000 PA 381 allocated" one million dollars of public funds to the state police for responsibilities that the act requires the state police to perform. The contested issue is whether the million-dollar allocation made in 2000 PA 381 constitutes an "appropriation" within the meaning of art 2, § 9.
IV. APPLICATION
A. WAS THE COMMON UNDERSTANDING OF THE ARTICLE 2, SECTION 9 LIMITATION ON THE RIGHT OF REFERRAL AT THE TIME OF RATIFICATION DIFFERENT FROM THE PLAIN MEANING OF THE LANGUAGE?
The majority construes the language of art 2, § 9 in a plain and natural manner. Thus, it concludes that 2000 PA 381 is an act making an appropriation to a state institution and is thus exempt from the referral power. To read the limiting language of art 2, § 9 in any other manner would incorporate into that constitutional provision a meaning that is not apparent on its face. Accordingly, unless we are able to determine that this provision had some other particularized meaning in the collective mind of the 1963 electorate, we must give the effect to the natural meaning of the language used in the constitution.
Justice Cavanagh asserts that the common understanding of art 2, § 9 is different from the plain meaning given to this constitutional provision by the majority. Those who suggest that the meaning to be given a provision of our constitution varies from a natural reading of the constitutional text bear the burden of providing the evidence that the ratifiers subscribed to such an alternative construction. Otherwise, the constitution becomes no more than a  Rorschach 8  exercise in which judges project and impose their personal views of what the constitution should have said. 9 
 Interestingly, no one-not the dissents, the parties, or even the amici curiae-has attempted to provide a scintilla of historically based evidence that provides support for the belief that in 1963 the people of this state understood the limiting language of  art 2, § 9 to mean something other than what it naturally and plainly says. The reason for this omission is simple: There is not much historical background on the provision to report in the first instance. Moreover, that which exists fails to demonstrate that the people attributed a meaning other than the construction the majority gives to art 2, § 9.
Within the limited time constraints occasioned by the exigencies of having to decide this case by the July 1, 2001, effective date of 2000 PA 381, we have searched for evidence that the common understanding is that proposed by Justice Cavanagh. We have found no such historical evidence in the record of the constitutional convention, at the time of our constitution's  ratification, or in contemporaneous news articles that provide support for the dissent's asserted "special" common understanding of art 2, § 9.
Indeed, one might expect that the framers of our 1963 Constitution-the participants of the constitutional convention that drafted the constitutional text that was eventually ratified-would have provided some gloss on or construction of the intended meaning of the art 2, § 9 limitation on the right of referral. In point of fact, the framers provided none.
Surprisingly, during the entire constitutional convention, excepting references to the convention's successive procedural approvals of the provision at issue, the framers never discussed the substance of art 2, § 9. 10  Especially important, nothing in the convention record has any bearing on what the framers, much less the public, "commonly understood" about the limitation on the referral power created by the constitutional language selected-"acts making appropriations for state institutions."
Particularly noteworthy in this regard is the "Address to the People" accompanying Const 1963, art 2, § 9. The address, officially approved by the members of the constitutional convention, provides the text of each provision of the proposed constitution the people ratified in 1963 and a commentary, written in simple language, explaining the import of each provision and any changes the proposed constitution made to comparable provision of the 1908 constitution. That address was widely distributed to  the public before the ratification vote. 11  The address was intended as a vehicle to educate the public about the proposed constitution.
 Significantly, in the "Address to the People" accompanying Const 1963, art 2, § 9, the framers advise the people that this provision constitutes only a "revision" of Const 1908, art 5, § 1, and that the revision "eliminates much language of a purely statutory character." 2 Official Record, p 3367. The address also notes that the revision "specifically reserves the initiative and referendum powers to the people [and] limits them as noted . . . ." 12   Id. (emphasis added). There is no further reference to the art 2, § 9 "limits" on the power of referral or any explanation regarding how those limitations were expected to function in practice.
 Thus, the 1963 constitutional record provides no basis for concluding that the people were led to believe (or actually entertained the notion) that the art 2, § 9 limitation on the right of referral-"acts making appropriations for state institutions"-meant or was intended to mean anything other than what it  plainly says. Similarly, I have been unable to locate (and no one has provided to the Court) any contemporaneous news articles or other documents circulated in the public domain that suggest that the public in 1963 had a specific or "common" understanding of art 2, § 9 that diverged from the natural and plain meaning of its text. [13  ] 
 The absence of any evidence from the 1963 constitutional convention record or other contemporaneous articles in the public domain suggesting support for some kind of special "common understanding" about art 2, § 9 consistent with the dissents' view (or any other) ought to be conclusive. In the absence of evidence on this point, this Court should accord the language in question its natural, plain meaning.
B. JUSTICE CAVANAGH'S ASSERTED "COMMON UNDERSTANDING" THAT "APPROPRIATIONS" MEANS "GENERAL APPROPRIATIONS" IS ALSO AT VARIANCE WITH THE STRUCTURE OF THE CONSTITUTION
Lacking any evidence that the citizens believed they were ratifying a provision that meant something quite  different from that of the plain language of art 2, § 9, Justice Cavanagh nevertheless presumes that this must have been the case. He is able to so conclude because he is convinced that the natural construction the majority gives to art 2, § 9 produces an "absurd result": 14 
 
I am confident that the constitutional right of referendum, in this narrow context, should not be taken away by so transparent an artifice. Justice COOLEY's "great mass of the people" would, if asked, surely suppose that "acts making appropriations for state institutions,"  which deny the people's reserved power of referendum, are general appropriations bills containing substantial grants to state agencies. Those grants would have to ensure the viability of the agencies, or, as the Court of Appeals put it, support the agencies' "core functions." 246 Mich. App. ___; ___ N.W.2d ___ (2001). The people of Michigan, I am certain, never intended to authorize the 2000 lame duck Legislature's legerdemain. [Slip op at 9.][15  ]
 I believe that Justice Cavanagh's presumption is unfounded because (1) it is not grounded in an assessment of what the voters in 1963 understood art 2, § 9 to mean, and (2) it does not give sufficient weight or meaning to the expressly stated competing language and values embodied in our constitution or the differences between the power of initiative and referral. 
 In this regard, it is important to consider the relationship between the constitutional power accorded to the Legislature, Const 1963, art 4, § 1, and the specific means chosen in the initiative and referendum provisions that check the power of the Legislature. 16  Without question, art 4, § 1 gives the Legislature plenary power to enact laws for the benefit of Michigan citizens. Equally clearly, art 2, § 9 provides a means for citizens directly to challenge Legislative action or inaction. I believe that it is a matter of constitutional significance that the initiative power contains no limitation (save procedural requirements such as those concerning when the initiative process can be commenced and the number of people who must support it), but that the referendum power is expressly limited by two substantive restrictions-an exception to the power of referral for acts "making appropriations for state institutions," and an exception for those acts enacted to "meet deficiencies in state funds." 17  
Stated otherwise (leaving aside momentarily the question of what the people understood in 1963 the art 2, § 9 term "appropriations" meant), it appears unchallenged that "acts making appropriations" are always subject to nullification by initiative, but such acts are exempted from the referral power. Because  exercise of both the referral and initiative powers may result in the nullification of a law enacted by the Legislature, one may well ask: Why, when the people enacted two provisions that are clearly intended as checks on the constitutional power of the Legislature, would the people substantially limit their power of referral, but not their power of initiative? Based upon the structure of these provisions, the answer appears obvious that the people feared more the circumstance of preventing acts involving "appropriations" from becoming law (the referral power) than they feared a nullification vote on the very same bill after it became  effective. Otherwise they would not have imposed an exception to their power of referral.
Justice Cavanagh asserts that the "appropriations" limitation on the people's referral power could only have been intended to mean "general appropriations bills containing substantial grants to state agencies." Slip op at 9. I question why that conclusion is justified, particularly given that even the dissent notes the framers' drafting precision concerning matters involving the general budget. See slip op, pp 7-8. I wholeheartedly agree with Justice Cavanagh that the framers intended to improve and increase legislative accountability for legislative general budgeting processes and were very precise in their draftsmanship to accomplish this goal. See, e.g., Const 1963, art 4, § 31 (general appropriation bills, priority, statement of estimated revenue). 18  Justice Cavanagh assumes,  without providing support, that the people believed that only general appropriation acts were referenced in art 2, § 9.
 Concerning art 4, § 31, in the Address to the People the framers advised:
This is a new section designed to accomplish two major purposes:
1. To focus legislative attention on the general appropriation bill or bills to the exclusion of any other appropriation bills, except those supplementing appropriations for the current year's operation.
2. To require the legislature (as well as the governor by a subsequent provision) to set forth by major item its own best estimates of revenue.
The legislature frequently differs from executive estimates of revenue. It is proper to require that such differences as exist be specifically set forth for public understanding and future judgment as to the validity of each. [2 Official Record, p 3375.]
Thus, the people were specifically advised in 1963 that the focus of this provision was to ensure accountability for the making of the entire state budget. A reciprocal provision applicable to the Governor, art 5, § 18, 19  was also added in 1963. These   were entirely new provisions added to the 1963 constitution whereas the language of art 2, § 9 was carried forward from the 1913 amendment to the 1908 constitution.  The 1908 constitution had no provisions comparable to art 4, § 31 and art 5, § 18.
 The point is that, contrary to Justice Cavanagh's suggestion, none of these general budget provisions added in 1963 were connected by the framers to the older language of art 2, § 9. More important for our purpose of discerning whether there was a "special" common understanding of art 2, § 9 as the dissent supposes, it is noteworthy that the framers clearly never communicated to the people that the new general budget provisions had any bearing on other legislative acts, such as 2000 PA 381, that merely made an appropriation of public funds to a state institution. In short, the general budget provisions of the 1963 constitution do not appear to be related to other kinds of bills that simply "appropriate" for purposes other than the general budget process. 20  
  Most important to my conclusion that Justice Cavanagh is simply wrong in supposing that art 2, § 9 refers to general appropriation bills is the fact that art 4, § 31 provides a definition of "appropriation bill," 21  and only this category of bills is tied to the annual budget process. Thus, had the framers intended that the art 2, § 9 "appropriations" limitation on the right of referral mean "a general appropriations bill" as urged by the dissent, then I believe that the framers would have done two things that they clearly did not do. First, I think the framers would have used in art 2, § 9 the art 4, § 31 definition of "appropriation bill." Second, I believe the framers would have advised the public in the Address to the People of the relationship between the newly added general budget provisions (including the definition of appropriation bill) and the older language of art 2, § 9 limiting the power of referendum.
 When it is so apparent throughout the 1963 constitution that the framers sought to clarify the budget-related appropriations process, I think that the above-noted omissions underscore that the kind of "appropriations" referenced in art 2, § 9 have nothing to do with those referenced in art 4. Further, there is no evidence of which we are aware that in 1963 the people had a contrary "common understanding."
Moreover, greater assurance that there was no "common understanding" contrary to the plain language of art 2, § 9 is derived from the controversy that culminated in this Court's split decision in Todd v Hull, 288 Mich. 521; 285 N.W. 46 (1939). In Todd, this  Court was called upon to determine whether 1939 PA 3 22  was properly given immediate effect pursuant to Const 1908, art 5, § 21, 23  notwithstanding  that, by giving the act immediate effect, the Legislature had encroached upon Const 1908, art 5, § 1 (the precursor of Const 1963, art 2, § 9. Four members of the Todd Court agreed, with little explanation, with the plaintiffs' assertion that 1939 PA 3 was not in the category of "acts making appropriations" within the meaning of art 5, § 21. However, four other justices observed that
there is no question but that the act makes an appropriation. An act making an appropriation as used in the Constitution is a legislative act which sets apart or assigns to a particular purpose or use a sum of money out of what may  be in the treasury of the State for a specific purpose and objects,-an act authorizing the expenditure of public funds for a public purpose. [Todd 288 Mich. at 531.] 
Regarding the referral question, these four justices additionally opined that 
the claim that plaintiffs are entitled to a referendum is effectually disposed of by the language of the Constitution itself because if the legislature had a right to give the act in question immediate effect, then it negatived the idea of a referendum. [Todd, 288 Mich. at 535.]
 The significance of Todd is not that it conclusively construed the same language at issue in this case. The fact is, Todd-a split decision-has no precedential value. Todd is nevertheless highly relevant because it involves a claim, similar to the one made here, that the Legislature's inclusion of an appropriation in 1939 PA 3 was a "mere subterfuge," Todd at 531, to place it within the category of acts that could be given immediate effect and thus be immune to referendum. 
Todd demonstrates that the people were aware in 1963 that the Legislature had exercised what it believed to be its appropriation prerogative in such a fashion as to diminish the people's right of referral. Notwithstanding, the people did not seek to change the constitutional referral language to preclude the Legislature from capriciously exercising its power of appropriation.
V. CONCLUSION
Determining the people's "common understanding" of a relatively obscure constitutional provision ratified  nearly forty years ago is admittedly a challenging deductive enterprise-one that must be grounded in the available evidence. Above all, it is not a psychic exercise. On the basis of the evidence we have independently sought, I conclude that there is no reliable evidence that the people commonly understood anything other than what art 2, § 9 plainly says: that the people's power of referral is precluded concerning any  act that makes an appropriation for a state institution. Accordingly, 2000 PA 381 falls within the category of "acts making appropriations for state institutions" and is thus not amenable to the people's right of referral under art 2, § 9.
The majority's decision today will undoubtedly disappoint those who passionately believe that 2000 PA 381 represents bad public policy. While it will be of no consolation, it bears restating that the serious underlying political question is not before the Court. 
In the current charged political environment, the dissent makes an emotionally appealing argument: Why not just let the people decide? Simply answered, the people's ability to decide by the referendum process is not infinite; rather, it is circumscribed by the limitations placed in the Michigan Constitution. While perhaps less satisfying to those who oppose 2000 PA 381, our answer is that the people are still free to directly challenge the propriety of the legislation by initiative. Const 1963, art 2, § 9; MCL 168.471 , 168.472. Additionally, if the people believe that the Legislature has abused its powers by capriciously precluding their power of referral, the traditional means of voter sanction remain recall and the ballot box. However, the limitations imposed in art 2, § 9 on the people's  right of referral preclude that they do so by means of referendum. 
Finally, while it may be attractive to some, I believe that the dissenter's approach is not only at odds with the constitution, but destroys the Legislature's direct accountability to the people for its acts by interposing the judiciary as an arbiter of essentially political questions that are fundamentally legislative in character. Consider Justice Cavanagh's tests of what he believes constitutes "appropriations" that do preclude referrals under art 2, § 9: (1) grants that "ensure the viability of [state] agencies"; or (2) grants that "support the agencies' 'core functions." (Slip op p 9.) Exactly how large an "appropriation" constitutes one sufficient to ensure the "viability"  of a state agency or, for that matter, its "core function"? What is a state agency's "core" function, what constitutes its "viability," and who gets to decide these questions-the Board of Canvassers, the Secretary of State, the courts? The dissenters are eager to have the courts decide these questions. Perhaps there are members of the public who believe that the courts are competent to address these issues. I submit that these are Delphic questions that neither a judge nor the judicial system itself is best equipped to answer. More to the point, the tests the dissenters urge to assess whether an act making an appropriation is nonetheless amenable to referral despite the express constitutional limitation are simply ones made up from whole cloth and which have no basis in the text of our constitution. The judiciary is not authorized to create ways of evading the terms of our constitution; nor should the courts manufacture tests that amount to no more than providing a means of promoting sitting judges' personal preferences  to accomplish such goals. Neither is a judicial function, and the public should never be confused on this issue. Our courts must refrain from engaging in such endeavors because they are beyond our constitutional authority and competence. 
MARKMAN, J. (concurring).
The issue before this Court is whether it will act as a court of law and read the constitution in accord with its plain language, or whether it will effect what many, perhaps even most, in this state view as a "good" thing. The majority opinion, in which I fully join, sets forth its analysis simply and straightforwardly. It does so  because the constitutional issue before us is simple and straightforward. I offer this concurrence only to emphasize the extremely important points of disagreement between the majority opinion, and the opinions of the Court of Appeals and my dissenting colleagues.
I. COURT OF APPEALS
Concerning the opinion of the Court of Appeals in this matter, I offer the following thoughts:
(1) The Michigan Constitution excepts from the referendum process "acts making appropriations for state institutions." It may well have been preferable for the constitution instead to have excepted from the referendum process: (a) merely acts that are necessary in order for the state to "exercise its various functions free from financial embarrassment"; (b) merely acts appropriating monies without which state agencies "would cease to function," or without which their "continued existence" would be in jeopardy; or (c) merely acts that pertain to the "core functions," or that are not "peripheral to the core purpose," of state  agencies. 1  However, the constitution did none of these. Rather, it excepted from the referendum process "acts making appropriations for state institutions." In reading into the constitution these alternative limitations upon the referendum process, the Court of Appeals has, without warrant, substituted its own judgment concerning how the constitution ought to read in place of the judgment of those who actually proposed and ratified the constitution.
 (2) In particular, the Court of Appeals has, without warrant, substituted its own judgment for that of "We, the people of the State of Michigan" who "have ordained and established this constitution." 2  "This" constitution is one that, for better or worse, excepts from the referendum process "acts making appropriations for state institutions." It is not one that excepts from the referendum process a greater or a lesser range of legislative acts, depending upon the personal preferences of individual judges or the political imperatives of the moment. 
(3) In a truly remarkable statement, the Court of Appeals asserts:


 Even if we were to conclude that the statutory expenditures constituted appropriations for state institutions as contemplated by [the constitution], we would nevertheless hold that the overarching right of the people to their 'direct legislative voice' . . . requires that 2000 PA 381 be subject to referendum.
I would respectfully suggest that the "overarching right of the people" is to have the constitution that they have ratified given respect and accorded its proper meaning. The fundamental flaw in the Court of Appeals statement is evident in its very assertion. Who is to say, for example, that this particular "overarching right," "the right to a direct legislative voice," is more "overarching" than the right of the people to have the legislative judgment of their  elected representatives given effect over the objections of five percent of the electorate? In truth, in a system of constitutional government, we examine the language of the constitution itself to determine which rights are "overarching." Whether the referendum process or the legislative judgment should prevail in a particular case does not depend upon which right or which value is perceived to be more "overarching" by a judge, but rather upon which result is required by the terms of the constitution itself. There is, in fact, an "overarching right" to a referendum, but only in accordance with the standards of the constitution; otherwise, there is an "overarching right" to have public policy determined by a majority of the people's democratically elected representatives. 
(4) It is hard to imagine a single statement more fundamentally at odds with the genuinely "overarching right" of the people to responsible constitutional government than that of the Court of Appeals. I repeat it, for it evidences a profound misunderstanding  about the proper role of the judiciary that demands response:
Even if we were to conclude that the statutory expenditures constituted appropriations for state institutions as contemplated by [the constitution], we would nevertheless hold that the overarching right of the people to their 'direct legislative voice' . . . requires that 2000 PA 381 be subject to referendum.
What this apparently means is that, "even if we were to conclude" that the constitution stated one thing, the Court of Appeals panel would still abide by its own views in holding that the constitution meant a different thing. Thus, it could be that "even if we were to conclude" that the constitution prohibited prior restraints on the press, we would "nevertheless hold" that the "overarching right" of persons to a fair trial requires that newspapers not write irresponsibly about high-profile criminal cases. Or it could be that, "even if we were to conclude" that the constitution prohibited denying criminal defendants a right to a jury trial, we would "nevertheless hold" that the "overarching right" of judicial efficiency requires that exceptions sometimes be made to this requirement. In other words, no matter what the actual language of the constitution, the Court of Appeals panel will, in effect, create a "higher" constitutional law whose requirements will supersede those of the constitution ratified by "we, the people." This is not law; it is a prescription for judicial domination.
II. JUSTICE CAVANAGH'S DISSENT
Concerning the dissent of Justice Cavanagh in this matter, I offer the following thoughts:
 (1) In addition to the various standards fashioned by the Court of Appeals in replacing those set forth by the Michigan Constitution, the dissent adds the standard of "great public significance." Apparently, the greater the "public significance" of a law, the more essential it is that a referendum be allowed to proceed, notwithstanding the language of the constitution. For what it is worth, I am in complete agreement that 2000 PA 381 is a matter of "great public significance" and can easily appreciate why its opponents wish to make it the subject of a referendum. Nevertheless, it can be assumed that any measure that becomes the focus of a serious referendum effort will be a matter of "great public significance" and, in any event, the constitution does not make distinctions between those legislative enactments that some justices may view as of "great public significance" and those that are viewed as of lesser significance. 
 (2) Equally irrelevant to this Court's constitutional analysis are the dissent's various references to the "lame- duck" character of the Legislature 3 ; the fact that "firearms advocates and persons interested in hunting" are "pitted" against a "coalition of law enforcement, religious, and educational interest"; and the fact that some individual members of the Legislature view their colleagues as having improper motives in attaching an appropriations provision to 2000 PA 381. 
  (3) The dissent chastises the majority for having "neglected to recite" certain facts in its opinion. With all due respect, the majority has done no such thing. It has merely neglected to "recite" facts that are wholly irrelevant to its legal analysis, as is typically the case in our opinions. The majority, for example, views it as irrelevant for purposes of its legal analysis that the law under consideration is of "great public significance," or, in particular, that the law relates to a highly divisive political controversy. Rather, the constitution means exactly the same thing whether the law at issue pertains to firearms, to farming irrigation, or to any other conceivable subject matter. Therefore, reciting the details or the political or legislative history of the statute before us, beyond identifying the appropriations that it makes, would add nothing to the constitutional analysis. Furthermore, contrary to what would have been the case if the dissent's position had prevailed, "future litigants," concerning whom the dissent expresses such concern, will henceforth be apprised of the unvarying meaning of the constitution, and will not be required to count noses about how many justices view the law at issue in their future case as being of "great public significance," or whether the appropriations made in their future case involve a "core function" or are essential to the "continued existence" of some state agency. 
(4) The dissent describes the majority's constitutional analysis as one that "focuses narrowly on the superficially straightforward question," as being "legalistic," as being "pinched," and as being "overly literal." Such descriptions are typical of those uttered when a judge is frustrated in his ability to reach a particular result by the actual language of the law.  Contrary to the dissent, the majority does not interpret the constitution "literally" or "legalistically." There is simply no reasonable alternative interpretation to the words "acts making appropriations for state institutions." Again, it may well be that the dissent's formulation of the right of referendum is preferable to that of the constitution. However, such a determination is not for this Court to make- no matter how "publically significant" a law. As Chief Justice Marshall recognized in Marbury v Madison, nearly two centuries ago, it is the responsibility of the judiciary to say what the law "is," not what it believes that it "ought" to be. 4 
(5) The dissent's reference to Justice Cooley's rules of constitutional interpretation is apt, but misses the point. Constitutional interpretation varies from statutory interpretation principally because constitutional language tends to be more concise, and to relate to broader expressions of principle, than does statutory language. The language of constitutions, therefore,  also tends to be more susceptible to multiple interpretations than does the more precise and more thorough language of statutes. Justice Cooley's rules make clear how, in a constitutional context, broad language and general words are to be given reasonable meaning. When, however, constitutional language is straightforward, such as the eligibility requirements for a member of Congress, 5  or the procedural requirements of the legislative process, 6  we accord such language its plain and ordinary meaning.  "Reasonable minds, the great mass of the people themselves" tend to accord words such plain and ordinary meanings. Contrary to the dissent, Justice Cooley did not assert, in effect, that "apple" can mean "orange," if a group of citizens could be found who understood it in this sense. Rather, what he asserted was that ambiguous terms, those fairly susceptible to multiple understandings, should be assessed by his rules. The "common understanding" of most words is that they possess their plain and ordinary meanings. 7  
 (6) It should be noted that the dissent does not ultimately rest its interpretation upon any specific language or phrase contained in the constitution, since it cannot do so. Instead, it relies upon such amorphous concepts as "the overall approach" to legislation taken by the constitution's framers and the people who ratified it. But, rather than taking the framers and ratifiers of the constitution at face value and assuming that they intended what they plainly wrote, the dissent manages creatively to conclude that the framers and ratifiers meant something other than what they wrote. On what basis does it reach  such a conclusion? Does the dissent identify convincing statements in support of that proposition by the framers? Does the dissent point to evidence that "we, the People" were misled into believing that "acts" or "appropriations" really did not mean "acts" or "appropriations?" Does the dissent offer new historical information that the ratifiers understood that Detroit Auto Club, and other earlier decisions of this Court, were being reversed by the Constitution of 1963? No, there is no argument of this kind. 8  All that we are left with is that the dissent believes that the  drafters of the constitution, and "We, the People" who ratified it, should have adopted the referendum provision that it prefers. 9 
III. JUSTICE WEAVER'S DISSENT
Concerning the dissent of Justice Weaver in this matter, I offer the following thoughts:
 (1) The dissent asserts that Detroit Auto Club stands for the proposition that only appropriations that "enable the state to exercise its various functions free from financial embarrassment," or without which state agencies would "cease to function," are excepted from the referendum process. However, Detroit Auto Club, does not say this at all; rather, it merely stands for the proposition that the Michigan Highway Department is a "state institution." It does not even purport to address the issue of what constitutes "acts making appropriations." Of course, even if the decision had said what the dissent asserts, no decision of this Court can permanently transform the plain language of the constitution.
(2) The dissent asserts that "the majority fails to recognize the importance of the referendum, and this Court's responsibility to protect the people's power of the referendum, derived from the constitution . . . ." However, a better characterization of this Court's "responsibility," in my judgment, is that we have a responsibility to protect the people's power of referendum as set forth by the constitution, and we have a responsibility to protect the people's power of representative self-government as set forth by the constitution. Indeed, the principal "responsibility" of this Court is to read the language of the constitution faithfully. If the people wish to modify their constitution, they may do so under the terms of article 12, and the majority will attempt to interpret the modified constitution faithfully. But the majority will not act as a continuing constitutional convention and dilute the people's right to have their supreme law mean what it says.
  IV. JUSTICE KELLY'S DISSENT
Concerning the dissent of Justice Kelly in this matter, I offer the following thoughts:
(1) The dissent contends that the majority "ignores" the meaning of the word "for" as used in the constitutional provision "acts making appropriations for state institutions." I respectfully disagree. The relevant meaning of "for" in the instant context is "intended to belong to." 10  Clearly, in this case, the appropriation was "intended to belong to" the Department of State Police. Demonstrating that no word is too straightforward not to be transmuted beyond recognition, the dissent manages to conclude that what the framers and the people meant by using the word "for" was that only "appropriations aimed at satisfying the purpose or reason for which a state institution exists" are excepted from the referendum process. The premise of this  interpretation appears to be that there is a meaningful distinction between an agency qua agency, and the functions that are performed by such agency, i.e., that there is some disembodied assemblage of functions that are carried out by an agency that define its "essence" or "core" as distinct from the total array of functions that it is charged by the law with carrying out. This is plainly without any basis. If the Legislature determined tomorrow that the Department of State Police should, in addition to its current responsibilities, be assigned new responsibilities now belonging to the Department of Corrections, monies appropriated for such new responsibilities would be every bit as much "for" the Department of  State Police as monies appropriated "for" its current responsibilities. I am aware of no textual or other basis for understanding "for" to mean anything at all different in these circumstances.
(2) The dissent accurately asserts that "we start by examining the provision's plain meaning as understood by its ratifiers at the time of its adoption." I agree with that statement and I believe that this is exactly what the majority has done. The dissent has failed to produce a scintilla of evidence to demonstrate that the people of this state in 1963 understood the language "acts making appropriations for state institutions" to mean anything other than what it plainly says.
(3) Because the dissent is unable to produce evidence to contradict the idea that the people intended their constitution to mean what its words convey, in the end, it also relies upon such amorphous concepts as "the fundamental purpose of the general power of referendum" to justify its interpretation of the law. However, there is no "general power" of referendum in Michigan, but only a specific power of referendum as defined by the constitution. And whatever "fundamental purpose" can be discerned to the referendum power, such a purpose must be subordinate to the "fundamental purpose" of a constitution itself, which is that it establishes the ground rules for a system of self-government, and its words, where plain, must be taken seriously.
V. FINAL QUERY FOR THE DISSENTERS
Finally, I would address the following question to each of my dissenting colleagues: Had those who proposed  and ratified our constitution truly intended to limit the referendum power as the majority interprets it, how should they, how could they, have fashioned it any more clearly than they did in article 2, § 9? That is, what words should they have used that they did not? 11 
VI. CONCLUSION
I respectfully believe that the Court of Appeals and my dissenting colleagues, by transforming the plain meaning of the words of the constitution, would engage the judiciary in an exercise far beyond its competence and authority. While I can certainly understand the frustrations of those who disapprove of the substance of 2000 PA 381, such frustrations should not be viewed as a justification for giving a meaning to the constitution that is so irreconcilable with its language. 12 
 
