  
Concur




Young, C.J. (concurring).
I concur in the Court's order denying leave to appeal.
I write separately to express my strenuous disagreement with my dissenting colleague's belief that this Court ought to reconsider what remains of the parental immunity doctrine1  because I vigorously oppose the proposition that "the near-universal existence of liability insurance has attenuated [the] concern that the doctrine's abrogation would endanger intra-family relationships."2 
No matter how conscientious, parents will inevitably make decisions regarding the care and upbringing of their children that, in hindsight, constitute errors in judgment. Unfortunately, some of these errors may result in harm to a child. However, everyday parental decision-making should not be complicated by the threat of trial lawyers. Permitting a child (or another parent) to sue a parent for an error in judgment because an insurance policy exists does not lead to better parenting—as those who would abolish what remains of parental immunity must posit. In this case, for example, defendant used the restroom and left his daughter momentarily unattended while she played in the shallow water of a lake during a party attended by thirty to fifty people. Tragically, she drowned.3 
One can be certain that it is not the ordeal of litigation that forms the basis of defendant's regret regarding the outcome of that horrible day. More fundamentally, a monetary judgment against defendant,  regardless of the funding source, will not make defendant a better parent to his remaining children. It is axiomatic that not every harm is or should be compensable at law—even when insurance is footing the bill.
Further abrogation of the "parental immunity" doctrine will expose all parental decisions regarding the upbringing of their children—however mundane or discretionary—to litigation. However, my dissenting  colleague argues that this Court should reconsider the validity of the exceptions to the abrogation of parental immunity articulated by this Court in Plumley. I believe that those exceptions are worthy of retention.
What remains of the parental immunity doctrine recognizes that the parent-child relationship merits different treatment for purposes of tort litigation than the relationships between strangers or business associates. The Plumley exceptions serve vital purposes, such as the "preservation of domestic tranquility and family unity" and "the need to avoid judicial intervention into the core of parenthood and parental discipline . . . ."4  The exceptions recognize that "[e]ach parent has unique and inimitable methods and attitudes on how children should be supervised. Likewise, each child requires individualized guidance depending on intuitive concerns which only a parent can understand."5  Thus, although this Court abrogated parental immunity, the Plumley exceptions still recognize and preserve the importance of the family unit and the need for its autonomy.6 
The notion that "the near-universal existence of liability insurance has attenuated [the] concern that the doctrine's abrogation would endanger intra-family relationships" is a singularly misguided and shocking idea. Its animating value is the view that litigation, in and of itself, serves some universal therapeutic goal. Only a lawyer could believe this. Litigation among family members over family problems is not a positive development for our society for any group other than those whose livelihood depends upon the promotion of litigation. Indeed, the fact that insurance might be available to fund litigation between parents over child rearing disputes is likely to promote collusive suits.
Unlike the dissenting Justice, who believes that the doctrine of parental immunity is "ripe for reconsideration,"7  I do not support treating family members as though they are no different from any other commercial parties to a lawsuit. The family unit is a unique, revered institution under assault from many quarters. This Court ought not be one of its assaulters.
I support retaining the exceptions to the abrogation of parental immunity because the exceptions value the integrity and cohesion of the family rather than promoting litigation. Accordingly, I concur in the Court's order denying the application.
Cavanagh and Hathaway, JJ., would grant leave to appeal.
