 with CORRIGAN, J.
YOUNG, J. (dissenting). I respectfully dissent from the new majority's enactment of this unconstitutional rule of disqualification. In eliminating all due process protections, compromising and chilling protected First Amendment rights, and conducting secret appeals that might lead to the removal of an elected justice from a case against his will, the majority has created a 21st Century Star Chamber with its new disqualification rule.
 The issue here is not whether this Court should have a disqualification rule--we have had a disqualification rule for 173 years that mirrored the rule that the United States Supreme Court continues to use--but rather which disqualification rule best ensures that parties whose cases are decided by this Court have neutral arbiters deciding those cases. Every member of this Court purports to subscribe to the elementary principle of due process that parties whose cases are decided by this Court must have impartial justices deciding those cases. 35  However, the plain fact is that the rule issued today is facially unconstitutional in several critical ways, with the result that it will allow four justices to disenfranchise the millions of Michigan voters who elected a justice. And it is also the fact that the justices who voted for this rule--KELLY, CAVANAGH, WEAVER and HATHAWAY--enacted this new rule despite having knowledge that the rule was constitutionally deficient. 36  The citizens of Michigan should be concerned when a majority of their Supreme Court is indifferent to the state and federal constitutions they have been entrusted and have sworn to uphold.
 The New Rule Violates the Fourteenth Amendment Right to Due Process
The removal of a sitting justice against his or her will is a serious matter trenching upon the right to execute the duties of the office to which the justice was elected, as well as an infringement on the rights of electors who placed the justice in office. A justice subject to a motion for disqualification is entitled to the basic due process rights of notice and opportunity to be heard. 37  Heretofore, only an appeal to the United States Supreme Court could reverse a Michigan justice's determination regarding a motion to disqualify. In an appeal taken from a Michigan justice's denial of a motion for disqualification, the challenged justice is entitled to the full range of due process rights that all appellees before the United States Supreme Court are entitled. A justice challenged on such an appeal from his decision not to recuse therefore has a right to counsel, to file briefs in opposition to the appeal, to have the issues on which the disqualification is predicated framed in advance, and the right to have it decided by a neutral arbiter. The new rule eliminates all of these due process rights.
The new rule creates an appellate process whereby the members of the Michigan Supreme Court, rather than the United States Supreme Court, will determine whether one of their challenged colleagues may sit on a case. By interposing itself as an appellate body in the disqualification decision, this Court must afford the targeted justice no fewer rights than he enjoyed in such an appeal to the United States Supreme Court. As stated, a justice has the right to have an appeal be limited to the grounds stated in the motion for disqualification, to retain counsel in the matter, and to submit a brief in response to the motion for disqualification. Sometimes, due process will also necessitate an evidentiary hearing, as there may be facts in dispute between the moving party and the challenged justice. Notwithstanding these constitutional requirements of due process, the new majority protected none of them, even though I specifically raised each of them to the Court before this order entered and provided proposed language to the rule that would remedy these constitutional deficiencies.
 Moreover, if due process means anything--particularly in the disqualification setting where this issue is pivotal--a targeted justice is most assuredly entitled to have an impartial arbiter decide the question. When the United States Supreme Court is the arbiter, no serious question on this point arises. However, when the justices of this Court become the arbiters of a disqualification decision of one of its members, there are substantial questions whether an impartial arbiter is involved. It is no secret that this Court is riven with deep philosophical, personal, and sometimes frankly partisan cleavages. 38  Where personal and political biases could affect the decision-making of members of this Court in the new disqualification appeal process, I cannot imagine that due process demands anything less than the right to challenge the potential biases of the decision-makers in this appellate procedure. Yet the new rule provides no mechanism for challenging the bias of a member of this Court in the appeal process it establishes today. At the November 5, 2009 administrative conference, the new majority specifically repudiated Justice MARKMAN's proposed amendment addressing this issue. The new majority also refused to consider all of the specific due process rules I later proposed in writing. The majority's open rejection of these basic constitutional protections indicates that it is willing to sacrifice essential requirements of due process in enacting this rule. The open question is why.
  The New Rule also Violates the First Amendment Right to Freedom of Speech
Even beyond the specific due process requirements that the new majority has thrown overboard, the new rule facially violates a judge's First Amendment rights. In every written constitution since 1850, the People of Michigan have retained their sovereign right to elect judges rather than surrender that right to some other process. Accordingly, judicial candidates in Michigan campaign for judicial office. In campaigning, they will engage in political speech that is clearly protected under the First Amendment. 39  The protection of speech guaranteed under the First Amendment is especially important within the context of political campaigns. James Madison, drafter of the First Amendment, wrote:
The value and efficacy of [the right of elections] depends on the knowledge of the comparative merits and demerits of the candidates for public trust, and on the equal freedom, consequently, of examining and discussing these merits and demerits of the candidates respectively. 40 
Thus, any restrictions on campaign speech not only infringe on a candidate's right to speak, but also infringe on the public's right to vote intelligently on their candidates.
The importance of citizens' decisions regarding whom to entrust with public office deserves no less than a robust public discussion of issues by candidates seeking their votes. The order issued today, however, frustrates this kind of political discussion between judicial candidates and voters and penalizes a judicial candidate for trying to do so. The order expressly contemplates that campaign speech protected under the First Amendment will nevertheless cause a duly-elected judge to be disqualified from hearing a case. This is so because the new rule establishes that campaign political speech is subject to an "appearance of impropriety" limitation. Apart from the fact that it is inherently a nebulous standard, 41  the "appearance of impropriety" standard is not a constitutional standard. 42  
 Thus, even if the challenged political speech in no way implicated actual bias against a party (or any other constitutional right of such a party), an elected justice is still liable to be disqualified if his campaign comments were later determined to create an appearance of impropriety. It is not hard to contemplate campaign speech that might offend and later be considered "improper" under the new rule's standard. 43  
Moreover, the mere threat of future disqualification produces a chilling effect on protected speech. The United States Supreme Court's decision in Republican Party of Minnesota v White struck down the Minnesota Supreme Court's rule forbidding an incumbent judge or candidate for judicial office from "announc[ing] his or her views on disputed legal or political issues" during an election campaign. 44  While the Minnesota
 Supreme Court's restriction on campaign speech was more expressly content-based than the rules promulgated by this order, the new majority here is attempting to achieve indirectly what the United States Supreme Court declared in White that a court could not do directly: stifle protected judicial campaign speech. The new "appearance of impropriety" standard is so broad and vague that judges and judicial candidates will be forced to self-limit their campaign speech so that, once they are elected, they can actually exercise the duties of the office they have sought. Thus, this rule is facially unconstitutional because it expressly allows a jurist's First Amendment right to free speech to be subordinated to a nonconstitutional standard. The new majority is untroubled by this obvious abridgement of First Amendment rights that their new rule causes. Again, the question remains how the new majority could be so unconcerned about such a serious matter.
 The Michigan Constitution Does Not Allow this Court to Remove a Justice from an Individual Case
Under the Michigan Constitution there are at most four ways a duly-sitting justice may be removed against his or her will:
- The People can choose not to reelect that justice. 45 
- The House can impeach a justice "for corrupt conduct or for crimes or misdemeanors" by majority vote. Upon impeachment, a judicial officer is forbidden from "exercis[ing] any of the functions of his office. . .until he is acquitted." The Senate can permanently remove a justice from office by a two-thirds vote. 46 
  - The House and Senate can enact a concurrent resolution removing a justice "[f]or reasonable cause" that "is not sufficient ground for impeachment" by a vote of 2/3 of the members elected to each house, at which time the governor "shall" remove the justice. 47 
- This Court can remove a justice from the Court upon recommendation of the Judicial Tenure Commission. 48 
Notably, these constitutional provisions only refer to removal of a justice from all cases, not from a particular individual case, as this order allows. It is important to note, however, that there is no provision in the Michigan Constitution that explicitly allows this Court to overturn the elective will of the People and remove a justice from an individual case, nor is there any language that would even implicitly provide such authority.
Significantly, the Michigan Constitution has provided extra protections for judicial officers that no other officeholder enjoys. And it is not hard to imagine why the People would want to insulate judicial officers from political attacks that would impede their ability to discharge their duties of office. Accordingly, our Constitution acknowledges the primacy of judicial office--even as between judicial office and executive or legislative offices. It expressly precludes the recall of judges by Michigan voters while allowing the recall of all other elective officers. 49  In other words, the People have decided that, once they have elected a justice, that decision is final, at least for the duration of the justice's eight-year term. This extraordinary constitutional protection for judicial office is an important backdrop against which to assess the new majority's asserted right to prevent a sitting justice from exercising the duties of his office. If statewide judicial elections are to mean anything, it should not be up to four justices to pick and choose when to allow the will of the People to be heard and when to stifle that will. By creating through court rule the power to remove justices from individual cases, the majority has done just that.
The authority of this Court to remove an elected justice from a particular case is, therefore, highly questionable. In issuing its new recusal rules, the new majority has not adequately considered, much less justified, the authority of the Court to remove a justice in a particular case, especially since such removal by the fiat of four silences the People, who elected seven particular justices to the Court, who are not fungible. I am not sure by what logic an administrative rule may be used to amend our Constitution and create a new authority whereby an elected justice can be removed from a case by his co-equal justices. While justices are constitutionally protected from political attacks from without, the new majority has conceived a clever means to launch political attacks from within the Court, giving a majority of four justices the ability to disenfranchise millions of Michigan voters by removing their elected justices from hearing cases that will affect their daily lives.
 The New Rule Will Enhance Gamesmanship That Will Undermine the Integrity of Judicial Elections and This Court
The new disqualification rule is simply bad policy that is the product of a manufactured crisis. Although it purports to ensure that only impartial justices sit on cases, the new rule has the effect of "weaponizing" disqualification as a tool to achieve countermajoritarian results to nullify elections. Shockingly, my colleagues have set themselves up as the gunners on the artillery they have manufactured.
For the entire existence of our Court, the justices of the Michigan Supreme Court have conscientiously striven to address questions of judicial qualification, whether raised on motion by a party or by the justice. They have done so under our unvaried practice that mirrors the one used by the United States Supreme Court. 50  In short, a justice confronted with a disqualification motion has typically consulted with members of this Court and made a determination whether participation in a particular matter was appropriate. Other than providing their personal counsel, other members of the Court have not participated in the decision.
Until recently, no one has challenged, or apparently had reason to challenge, the Court's historical practice for addressing the issue of a justice's disqualification. Of late, however, with the shift in the philosophical majority of this Court, 51  disqualification has taken on a new, more politicized role. One need look only as far as a recent volume of the Michigan Bar Journal for evidence of this new effort to politicize disqualification motions. In a letter to the editor, attorney John Braden suggests that the judicial electoral process is an unsatisfactory solution for addressing what he believed to be the unfavorable philosophy and decisions of the Court's former philosophical majority. 52  Therefore, he urged his colleagues in the Bar to use motions to disqualify as a suitable alternative to the electoral process guaranteed by the Michigan Constitution to alter the philosophical balance of the Court in order to achieve what he desired: more favorable results for his clients and himself. Moreover, it is entirely foreseeable that sophisticated and well-financed clients, like insurance companies and unions, will demand that their lawyers file motions for disqualification as a matter of course in order to alter the philosophical makeup of the Court in ways the electorate hardly intended. Thus, today's order is no less than a call for the use of disqualification as a non-electoral political weapon to remove judges with whose judicial philosophy one disagrees. My colleagues, wittingly or not, in enacting this new rule, give aid to this politicized use of disqualification motions.
Why do I claim that the new disqualification rule is a product of a "manufactured crisis"? The facts are very plain. After the Court's philosophical majority changed in 1999, disqualification motions became a tactic to alter the decision-making and outcome of a particular case. As I explained in my statement accompanying the proposed disqualification rules when originally published for public comment, each of the motions to disqualify made between 1999 and 2008 were brought against members of what was then the Court's philosophical majority. 53  Importantly, nearly all of the motions to disqualify brought during my tenure on this Court were the product of one law firm.
Each of the motions to disqualify made by this firm involved various allegations of claimed bias, principally stemming from political speech in Michigan Supreme Court judicial campaigns. 54  This firm has taken advantage of the review process that our traditional disqualification practice guaranteed parties, by appealing my previous denials of its motions to disqualify to the United States Supreme Court at least three times. Notably, that Court has denied certiorari on each occasion. 55  Moreover, this firm has unsuccessfully challenged in federal court the constitutionality of this Court's historic practice of handling motions for judicial recusal that the Court today is jettisoning. 56  While the United States Supreme Court has denied these meritless claims of bias directed at me, as its decision in the Caperton case demonstrates, when warranted, the United States Supreme Court is not uninterested in reviewing and reversing a state justice's decisions on disqualification. 57  
Finally, it is not beyond imagining that the new disqualification procedure will become fuel for the ever-intensifying fire of judicial election campaigns in Michigan. For example, if Candidate A is running a campaign against Justice B, it is entirely possible that Candidate A would make a campaign issue over the number of times that Justice B's colleagues voted that he could not be an impartial arbiter of a case. Although the new majority would no doubt deny it, the new rule it enacts today creates ample ammunition for future judicial electoral warfare.
 The New Rule was Enacted with Unseemly Haste and in Violation of the New Majority's Commitment to "Transparency"
I close with a final point about the new majority's methods in enacting the rule contained in today's order. So eager was the new majority to enact this unconstitutional rule that they did so with unseemly haste. 58  They not only ignored the obvious constitutional problems I and Justices CORRIGAN and MARKMAN had brought to their attention, they enacted the rule in violation of this Court's public administrative process. The order issued today does not contain the rule this Court voted on in its November 5, 2009 public administrative conference.
The disqualification rule approved at our November 5, 2009 administrative conference included my amendment to subsection (D)(1). When the motion to approve Justice HATHAWAY's proposed version of the rule was moved, it was explicitly subject to a friendly amendment I offered (which amendment Justice HATHAWAY accepted) regarding the language of subsection (D)(1). My amendment provided that the actual language of subsection (D)(1) of the rule would be determined at a later date after conferring with Justice HATHAWAY. In proof of this, I offer the following exchange that occurred at our November 5, 2009 public administrative conference when we voted on her proposal:
Chief Justice KELLY. Can we act on the motion at this point? Shall we start, Justice Hathaway?
Justice HATHAWAY. Well, first I'm going to include Justice Young's . . .
 Justice WEAVER. Well, no, you can just let him bring it up next time. Just keep it as it is.
Justice HATHAWAY. I move that this Court adopt my November 4, 2009 version of alternative C as Michigan Court Rule 2.003 regarding disqualifications of judges.
Justice WEAVER. Second.
Justice HATHAWAY. And I support.
Justice YOUNG. With a friendly amendment we can work out.
Justice HATHAWAY. Right. Regarding (D)(1).
Chief Justice KELLY. I think we've discussed this issue. Would you like to vote? [Roll call vote omitted.] It passes by a 4 to 3 vote. We have a new recusal rule. We will take it up again at next month's meeting for further discussion at least of (D)(1). 59 
Thus, this Court did not vote on a complete rule In our November 5, 2009 administrative conference. 60  
As this exchange shows, there remained a significant procedural issue to resolve before an order effectuating a new disqualification rule could enter and be given immediate effect: the actual language of subsection (D)(1) must still be settled. 61  Chief Justice KELLY acknowledged this and stated on the record that the rule would be returned to our December administrative conference to resolve the language of subsection (D)(1). All of this was done in open Court, and members of the public are invited to verify whether I have accurately represented the proceedings and vote by accessing the video recording of the administrative conference from the State Bar of Michigan's "Virtual Court." 62  
Therefore, I believe that issuing an order today before resolving the status of my amendment is improper and a contravention of the Court's commitment to conduct its administrative matters in public. The issuance of the order today enacting this new disqualification rule that was not approved in open Court belies any pretense that this Court is functioning "transparently."
Given the stated desire of this rule's proponents for having this Court's business done "in an open, transparent, restrained, orderly, fair, and efficient manner," 63  there is another important aspect of this new rule that violates the new majority's alleged interest in transparency: The rule enacted today permits an elected justice of this Court to be removed from a case in secrecy. At our November 5, 2009 conference, Justice MARKMAN proposed and the new majority repudiated an amendment that would require all appeals of a justice's initial decision to deny a motion for disqualification to be heard in an open session of this Court. So much for the openness and transparency that the new majority has continuously trumpeted.
Finally, as its proponents admit, this order is but an opening salvo for additional radical changes to this Court, including the unconstitutional replacement of an elected justice with some other judge not elected to the Supreme Court. 64  At our November 5, 2009 administrative conference, Chief Justice KELLY indicated her support for the new disqualification rule but also reiterated that it was only "the first step in the realization of a truly excellent rule." She considers it "essential" for this Court to have a rule that would allow the "replac[ement of] a disqualified justice with another judge for the purpose of hearing the case involved." As Justice CORRIGAN explained in great detail in her statement on the proposed disqualification rules, 65  unlike other states, the People of Michigan have not authorized this Court to appoint temporary justices. Rather, the Michigan Constitution provides that "[t]he supreme court shall consist of seven justices elected at non-partisan elections as provided by law." 66  Thus, this order appears to be preparatory for additional unconstitutional changes to this Court that would further disenfranchise Michigan voters.
This is truly a sad day for this Court, the citizens of Michigan, and for the judicial elective system that our citizens as sovereign have mandated. For all of these reasons, I dissent.
CORRIGAN, J., concurs with YOUNG, J.
MARKMAN, J. (dissenting). In place of a judicial disqualification rule that has worked satisfactorily for over 175 years to ensure an honorable Michigan Supreme Court and that remains employed by the United States Supreme Court and the majority of other state supreme courts, the new rule adopted by the majority, by establishing justices as the reviewing authority for the disqualification decisions of other justices and by adopting a vague "appearance of impropriety" standard applicable to all judges throughout the state: (a) will incentivize disqualification motions and thereby produce a considerable increase in the number of such motions and in the amount of time and effort devoted by this Court to addressing such motions; (b) will introduce an unprecedented degree of gamesmanship and politicization into the judicial process by enabling attorneys to influence which duly-elected justices will be allowed to participate in deciding their own cases and controversies; and (c) will seriously undermine the collegiality of this Court. In the end, the new rule is far more likely to reflect adversely upon the integrity of this Court than it is to enhance this Court's standards of conduct.
Although I opposed the adoption of the new rule, recognizing that there was majority support, I did move for the adoption of four amendments. Each of these was rejected by the same 4-3 vote. Most importantly, in my judgment, the majority refused to adopt the following amendment:
All disqualification decisions other than the challenged justice's own initial decision shall be decided in public administrative session.
For this Court to disqualify an elected justice of this Court from participation in a case constitutes an action of extraordinary significance in a democratic system of judicial selection and should be undertaken in as open and as transparent a manner as possible. Indeed, it is hard to imagine a more consequential decision of this Court than that of some justices disqualifying an elected and coequal colleague. In view of the emphasis on transparency that has motivated this Court to adopt open administrative hearings, I cannot think of an action that more compellingly requires an open decision-making process than that of determining which justices will, and which justices will not, be allowed to participate in a case. The people are entitled to know why a justice whom they have elected to serve on this Court has been deprived of this right, and they are entitled to the opportunity to assess the rationale and motives of those who have rendered this judgment.
The majority also rejected the following amendment:
A justice shall raise the issue of another justice's disqualification within 14 days after the former discovers the alleged basis for disqualification, including where a justice discovers the alleged basis during a non-public conference of the Court.
This amendment would have made clear that a justice may raise the issue of another justice's disqualification and that such disqualification could be predicated upon inappropriate conduct or behavior reflected during closed conferences. Tellingly, the single justice on this Court who has repeatedly cast public aspersions upon colleagues on the basis that they have committed unspecified misconduct and misbehavior at closed conferences not only voted against this amendment, but also voted against the amendment requiring public deliberation on disqualification motions. Under this amendment, in the event a justice exhibits bias or prejudice for or against a party or an attorney, another justice would have 14 days from when they first became aware of this to move for that justice's disqualification. Absent an opportunity for a justice to sua sponte challenge the participation of another justice, statements of genuine bias or prejudice made in the context of confidential case discussions cannot be addressed, and attorneys exclusively will control the flow of disqualification motions, in particular, the few attorneys who have demonstrated a disproportionate inclination to repeatedly offering disqualification motions. Moreover, MRPC 8.3(b) requires "[a] lawyer having knowledge that a judge has committed a significant violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct that raises a substantial question as to the judge's honesty, trustworthiness, or fitness for office [to] inform the Judicial Tenure Commission." Given that the justices of this Court are all lawyers, it seems clear that our rules of conduct require us to raise disqualification issues if we believe that a justice should be disqualifying himself and is not doing so.
The majority likewise rejected the following amendment:
Participation in a disqualification decision is subject to the same disqualification procedures as are applicable to a justice's participation in a particular case.
This amendment was intended to ensure the integrity of the disqualifying justices with reference to the justice whose disqualification is being sought. For instance, if Justice A, the subject of a disqualification motion, believes Justice B is prejudiced against him, or is himself partial for or against lawyers or parties in a particular case, Justice A in fairness ought to be permitted to challenge the propriety of Justice B's participation in the disqualification decision. For instance, if Justice A may be disqualified from participation because he received a campaign contribution from a particular lawyer or party, it cannot be proper for Justice B, whose opponent received a contribution from that same lawyer or party, or who himself received a contribution from the opposing lawyer or party, to participate in the disqualification decision. Individual justices, no less than lawyers and parties, are entitled to a fair hearing before their rights are adjudicated, and this cannot be obtained if there is a conflict of interest between himself and the decision maker. Can a justice who has campaigned against the challenged justice, or who has benefitted from political support from the party or attorney seeking the disqualification, or who has benefitted from political support from groups or organizations that might be advantaged by a justice's disqualification, decide any better than the challenged justice himself whether the latter can participate in a case?
Lastly, the majority rejected the following amendment:
A decision by an individual justice to disqualify himself or herself from participation may be accompanied by a statement that provides the reasons for such decision, but this is not required.
This amendment would have maintained our existing practice of neither requiring nor prohibiting a statement by an individual justice deciding a motion. Making such statements mandatory is likely only to prove embarrassing to third persons who do not deserve to be embarrassed. Further, it is ironic that most of the justices in the majority have had no compunction in the context of even full-blown opinions of this Court in choosing not to offer even a whit of explanation for their positions.
As explained above, all four of my proposed amendments were rejected 4-3. So, now we have a rule that allows a majority of justices to decide behind closed doors which other justices can and cannot do what they were duly elected to do--participate in deciding cases and controversies--and without any regard to whether the justices making this decision are themselves biased in some manner. However, not only did the majority adopt a rule that confers upon itself the authority to determine which justices may participate in deciding what the law of this state is, but by adopting a novel "appearance of impropriety" standard--which applies to the entire judiciary in this state, not merely to the justices of this Court--it has enlarged its own discretion for rendering such decisions. The majority can now disqualify a justice from participation in a case even though it does not believe that the challenged justice is actually biased, but merely by reciting that it believes there to be some "appearance of impropriety."
The threshold problem, of course, with the new "appearance of impropriety" standard is its utter vagueness. What is an "appearance of impropriety," and from whose standpoint is the "appearance of impropriety" to be gauged? As this Court once explained, an "appearance of impropriety" standard will subject justices "to vague, subjective, and increasingly politically directed, allegations of misconduct, against which no justice could effectively defend himself or herself." Adair v Michigan, 474 Mich 1027, 1039, 709 N.W.2d 567 (2006) (statement of TAYLOR, CJ., and MARKMAN, J.), 1051 (statement of CORRIGAN, J.), 1053 (statement of YOUNG, J.). Further, an "appearance of impropriety" standard is likely to vitiate all other existing grounds for disqualification and create an ethical snare for judges. For example, under the new rule, MCR 2.003(C)(1)(e) requires a judge to disqualify himself where he had been a member of a law firm representing a party within the preceding two years, but MCR 2.003(C)(1)(b)(ii) requires a judge to disqualify himself if his participation would create an "appearance of impropriety." What if the judge has not been a member of the law firm that is representing a party for two years and one month? The judge would be able to participate under MCR 2.003(C)(1)(e), but would he be able to participate under MCR 2.003(C)(1)(b)(ii)? That is, if a judge would be required to disqualify himself if he has been a member of that law firm within the preceding two years, presumably because the chance of bias would be too substantial to allow his participation, could it truly be said that there was no longer any "appearance of impropriety" where that judge has not been a member of that law firm for two years and one month? Is that one month sufficient to alleviate any "appearance of impropriety"? Who knows? In the case of this Court, this decision will be left to the discretion of other justices who have been no less involved in the political process than the justice whose disqualification has been sought. In other words, there will no longer be any rules, or "safe harbor," on the basis of which a judge can act. Instead, everything will be dependent upon ad hoc standards applied on a case-by-case basis by justices whose own biases and prejudices will apparently never be subject to challenge.
Furthermore, how does the "appearance of impropriety" standard operate in connection with statutes that specifically permit certain actions? For instance, MCL 169.252 and 169.269 specifically allow individual and political committee contributions to Michigan judicial candidates up to certain limits. "Such limits must be understood as clearly reflecting the Legislature's, and the people's, understanding that contributions in these amounts will not supply a basis for disqualification." Adair, 474 Mich at 1042 (statement of TAYLOR, CJ., and MARKMAN, J.), 1051 (statement of CORRIGAN, J.), 1053 (statement of YOUNG, J.). "If justices . . . were to recuse themselves on the basis of [legal] campaign contributions to their or their opponents' campaigns, there would be potential recusal motions in virtually every appeal heard by this Court, there would an increasing number of recusal motions designed to effect essentially political ends, and there would be a deepening paralysis on the part of the Court in carrying out its essential responsibilities." Id. For these reasons, I believe that where a justice has abided by all applicable statutes and specific court rule provisions that address the asserted basis for disqualification, disqualification is not required. That is, I would "decline to allow general allegations of impropriety that might overlap with specifically authorized or prohibited behavior and conduct to supersede [statutes and court rules] that specifically apply to the conduct in question." In re Haley, 476 Mich 180, 195; 720 N.W.2d 246 (2005). "Otherwise, such specific rules and [statutes] would be of little consequence if they could always be countermanded by the vagaries of an 'appearance of impropriety' standard." Adair, 474 Mich at 1039 (statement of TAYLOR, CJ., and MARKMAN, J.), 1051 (statement of CORRIGAN, J.), 1053 (statement of YOUNG, J.). However, such details did not appear to interest the majority during the court's recent deliberations, and the relationship between the court rules and the new "appearance of impropriety" standard will undoubtedly be resolved on a case-by-case basis at the majority's standardless discretion.
I am also uncertain as to whether, where a justice has been prohibited from participation in a case on the basis that he is biased against an attorney, that justice will always be prohibited from participation in a case in which that attorney is involved. In other words, once a majority of this Court has determined that a justice is biased against an attorney, will parties then be permitted to effectively choose which justices can participate in their cases by simply choosing that attorney to represent them? This would take forum shopping to an altogether new length.
An additional concern I have with the new rule pertains to the manner by which a justice is to responsibly review his colleagues' disqualification decisions. That is, what is the basis upon which a justice is to know whether another justice is or is not biased for or against a party or an attorney, or whether his disqualification is required on other grounds? For example, if another justice is accused of having a "more than de minimis economic interest in the subject matter in controversy that could be substantially impacted by the proceeding," MCR 2.003(C)(1)(f), without knowing that justice's financial situation, how am I to render an intelligent and responsible decision? What may be a "de minimis economic interest" to one justice might be a substantial economic interest to another justice depending on the particular justice's financial situation. Are justices going to be required to disclose all information that may be pertinent to this decision? Am I then entitled to know the entirety of their, and their spouses', financial circumstances? Am I entitled to question such justice as to aspects of his financial circumstances? Am I entitled to review what I might consider to be relevant financial records or documents? Are fact-finding hearings to be required? If so, will these be done in public or behind closed doors like the disqualification decisions themselves? The majority was uninterested in discussing these and related questions when they were raised during debate.
For all these reasons, and especially for those set forth in the first paragraph of this statement, I strongly dissent from the adoption of the new disqualification rule. The majority will doubtlessly enjoy plaudits from those who fail to look beneath the surface of the majority's claims of "reform." However, as time goes by, it will become increasingly clear that the majority has replaced a time-tested disqualification procedure with one that will lead inevitably to politicization, gamesmanship, and acrimony. 67  
Staff Comment: The amendments adopted by the Court in this order explicitly apply the judicial disqualification rule to all state judges, including Supreme Court Justices. In addition, the amendments revise disqualification standards and establish procedures for the disqualification process.
  APPENDIX A  
The Detroit News
www.detnews.com
November 18, 2009
http://detnews.com/artlcle/20091118/OPINION01/911180309
Letter: New court rules may let minority win
The Nov. 10 editorial ("Justice disqualified") notes that "New rules on recusal of state Supreme Court members could cause problems with subjective standard." It is worse than that. The promulgation of the four-justice Michigan Supreme Court majority rule that permits justices to oust other justices from consideration of a case is a seizure of power without authority that is unprecedented in the history of the court.
The majority of justices speak for the court. But nothing in our Constitution gives a majority of justices -- and here, only a majority of justices who have not been challenged by a litigant, which might be a minority of the court -- the authority to decide whether another justice or justices may sit on a case. Undoubtedly some litigants will, calculating on past decisions that they are likely to lose 4-3 in a case, challenge two justices of what they perceive will be the majority.
Under the new recusal rule, the remaining justices will vote on whether the challenged justices may sit, and in a 3-2 vote the three justices who might be in the minority in the case may oust two other justices from the case.
In the U.S. Supreme Court, each justice individually decides questions of recusal in any case, and there is no recourse to either the chief justice or the rest of the court should a justice not excuse himself or herself from a case.
This is precisely because the members of that court understand the limits on their authority, which, unfortunately, four members of our state Supreme Court do not.
Tim Baughman, Royal Oak
  APPENDIX B
Commentary: Beware power grab for Michigan court
 DAN PERO
There's a discredited practice in politics: If you can't win the game, change the rules. The majority of justices on the Michigan Supreme Court is attempting to do just that by making it far easier to dismiss justices elected by Michigan voters from controversial cases and blatantly shift the balance of power on the court.
Michigan Supreme Court justices historically have voluntarily removed themselves from cases they cannot hear impartially. Under the new rules, the well-defined "actual bias" test for disqualification will be replaced by a fuzzy "appearance of impropriety" standard.
The definition of what constitutes the perception of bias is a moving target. Does a $ 1,000 campaign contribution create the "appearance" that a justice cannot be impartial? Who knows?
 What happens if a trial lawyer compares a judge to "Adolf Hitler and Goebbels," as Geoffrey Fieger has done? Isn't it easy to claim there is at least an "appearance" that a judge who has been tagged with that epithet shouldn't rule in cases involving that lawyer? What's to stop an unscrupulous attorney from smearing a justice so the justice is removed from cases down the road?
The new rules also make the disqualification process less transparent and accountable.
Under the old system, litigants could request that individual justices recuse themselves, but the justices made the ultimate decision on whether to hear a case. This worked well in Michigan because justices knew if they abused this process or ruled on cases in which there was clear bias, voters could throw them off the court in the next election.
The new rules, however, give justices the power to request (and achieve) the removal of their colleagues. This policy invites retaliatory recusal demands and endless bias accusations, especially given the petty and vindictive proclivities of many court members.
Even worse, justices will be allowed to vote on disqualification challenges with no public oversight. Any justice can be removed from any case for any reason -- and the court will never have to justify or even explain its actions to the voters.
This is an especially ironic twist since the new liberal majority has railed for more transparency. Justice Elizabeth Weaver has made it her mantra. Justice Diane Hathaway campaigned on it. And Chief Justice Marilyn Kelly promised it.
There's not a shred of evidence the existing rules failed to keep Michigan's high court impartial, giving this entire exercise the whiff of partisan politics and ideological gamesmanship. In the future, any combination of four justices on the seven-member court can temporarily unseat a democratically elected colleague and shift the direction of the court. The result will be heightened cynicism about the judicial branch.
The court's new recusal rules are the culmination of an effort to get conservative justices off the court -- or at least push them to the sidelines. If the court does so, it will undermine the ability of Michigan voters to decide who is going to hear the cases that affect their lives, jobs and businesses.
 Dan Pero, former chief of staff to Gov. John Engler, is president of the American Justice Partnership, a national organization headquartered in Lansing that focuses on enacting legal reform at the state level. E-mail comments to letters@detnews.com">letters@detnews.com
 APPENDIX C
MEMORANDUM FOR COURT USE ONLY
TO: The Justices
cc: Corbin Davis, Mike Schmedlen, and Danilo Anselmo
DATE: November 2, 2009
FROM: Justice Maura Corrigan
SUBJECT: ADM 2009-04, # 3 on 11/5/09 administrative agenda
In light of my call for further study of Caperton v A T Massey Coal Co, Inc, 556 U.S. 868; 129 S Ct 2252; 173 L. Ed. 2d 1208 (June 8, 2009), 1  I would like to share my follow-up research with regard to whether and how Caperton bears on courts' general recusal policies. The Caperton opinion itself, courts' and commentators' interpretations of Caperton, and court practices in the wake of Caperton have convinced me that Caperton applies very narrowly and does not suggest that due process requires us to change our recusal practices. Indeed, this Court would be a true outlier if we read Caperton to require evidentiary hearings or a vote by the full Court in order to resolve recusal motions consistent with due process principles. The fact that Caperton does not require such changes to our historical recusal practice provides additional support for my vote in favor of alternative A.
First and foremost, the Caperton majority took pains to explain the limited nature of its holding. Indeed, it devoted Part IV of the opinion to clarifying that the Court's "decision today addresses an extraordinary situation where the Constitution requires recusal." 129 S. Ct. at 2265. It  specified: "the facts now before us are extreme by any measure." 129 S. Ct. at 2265. 2  Otherwise, it acknowledged that "'most matters relating to judicial disqualification [do] not rise to a constitutional level.'" 129 S. Ct. at 2259, quoting FTC v Cement Institute, 333 U.S. 683, 701; 68 S. Ct. 793; 92 L. Ed. 1010; 44 F.T.C. 1460 (1948).
Recall that Caperton held that a state supreme court justice was disqualified from hearing a case involving a corporate party whose chairman and CEO made "extraordinary efforts to get [the justice] elected" by expending $ 3 million to support the justice's campaign. 129 S. Ct. at 2262. Caperton explicitly limited itself to "the context of judicial elections," 129 S. Ct. at 2262, and, more specifically, to extreme facts when a party directs or significantly contributes to a campaign while that party's case is pending. See 129 S. Ct. at 2263 ("Not every campaign contribution by a litigant or attorney creates a probability of bias that requires a judge's recusal, but this is an exceptional case."), 129 S. Ct. at 2263 ("[T]here is a serious risk of actual bias … when a person with a personal stake in a particular case had a significant and disproportionate influence in placing the judge on the case by raising funds or directing the judge's election campaign when the case was pending or imminent."), 129 S. Ct. at 2264 ("The temporal relationship between the campaign contributions, the justice's election, and the pendency of the case is … critical."), 129 S. Ct. at 2265 ("The parties point to no other instance involving judicial campaign contributions that presents a potential for bias comparable to the circumstances in this case.")
Accordingly, I tend to agree with the following observations by former Texas Chief Justice Thomas Phillips, who authored the amicus brief in Caperton on behalf of the Conference of Chief Justices, concerning the limited scope of Caperton:
 Some have suggested that judges can never rule in any case where parties to a case or their attorneys are donors. It does no such thing. The holding, as I read it, is that due process is only violated when "[1] a personwith a personal stake in a particular casehad a significantand disproportionate influencein placing the judge on the case …when the case was pending or imminent." Given how narrow that holding is, I'm not sure Caperton will ever be direct precedent for another recusal. [Coping With 'Caperton': A Q&A With Former Texas Chief Justice, Tony Mauro, The National Law Journal June 11, 2009.]
Cases interpreting Caperton have reached similar a conclusion, that is: Caperton is limited to extreme facts in the context of campaign support in judicial elections. For just a few examples see Rhiel v Hook (In re Johnson), 408 BR 123, 127 (Bankr, SD Ohio 2009) (Caperton is limited to "the specific issue of recusal 'in the context of judicial elections'"); Ala Dep't of Pub Safety v Prince, 34 So. 3d 700; 2009 Ala Civ App LEXIS 510 (Oct 2, 2009) (quoting Chief Justice Roberts' dissent to observe that it is unclear whether Caperton applies beyond financial support in judicial elections but, in any event, the majority made clear that Caperton was "an exceptional case" that presented "extreme facts" and concluding that the facts in the case before it "are not the 'extreme facts' of Caperton"); Marek v Florida, 14 So 3d 985, 1000 (Fla 2009) (rejecting a defendant's claim that his constitutional right to due process was violated under Caperton when the same judge presided over his 1984 sentencing and the 1988 evidentiary hearing on his initial motion for postconviction relief; Caperton's "extraordinary facts regarding a litigant's campaign contributions to a state supreme court justice" are "irrelevant" to this case); South Dakota v List, 2009 SD 73, 8; 771 N.W.2d 644 (SD 2009) (citing Caperton for the proposition that "most matters relating to judicial disqualification [do] not rise to a constitutional level").
Perhaps most significantly, the few state courts I have discovered that have publicly considered whether Caperton bears on their recusal practices have primarily addressed the case's ramifications for rules concerning contribution limits to judicial elections. These states have not read Caperton to require evidentiary hearings or a vote by unchallenged judges or justices, 3  For example, the Supreme Court of Nevada's Commission on the Amendment to the Nevada Code of Judicial Conduct issued a supplementary report recommending two additional rule changes in response to Caperton; both changes address recusal on the basis of a judge's financial or electoral campaign support from a party or attorney. 4  Similarly, on October 28, 2009, the Wisconsin Supreme Court conducted a hearing on petitions asking whether to amend the Supreme Court Rules concerning judicial campaign contributions and whether there are circumstances when recusal is required if a party or lawyer in an action "previously made a campaign contribution to or spent money on a media campaign relating to a judicial election for a judge who is presiding in the case." 5  But thus far, my research has not revealed that any state supreme court has read Caperton even to potentially require evidentiary hearings or a vote of the full Court. It is worth further noting that the United States Supreme Court appears not to have amended its own recusal process--which comports with our own historical practice--in the wake of Caperton. 6  
Along these lines, I again note the comments, published by Michigan Lawyers Weekly, of Wayne County Assistant Prosecuting Attorney Timothy Baughman concerning Caperton:
Caperton is a case about standards and not about the identity of the decision-maker. . . .
* * *
Nothing in Caperton requires that the decision on a recusal motion be reviewed by another justice or body of justices. For the Michigan Supreme Court [to continue] to follow the practice of the U.S. Supreme Court is perfectly permissible, so long as a system of "objective rules" exists. ['Caperton' was about recusal standards, not decision maker, Michigan Lawyers Weekly, June 22, 2009, p 7.]
For these reasons, my study of Caperton convinces me that it does not require any changes to our recusal rules. Accordingly, I reiterate my support for alternative A in this file, which effectively codifies our historical recusal practice and does not require a vote of the Court under any circumstances.
  APPENDIX A  
MEMORANDUM
TO: The Justices
cc: Corbin Davis & Mike Schmedlen
FROM: Justice Robert P. Young, Jr.
RE: ADM 2009-04, Disqualification
DATE: November 19, 2009
Before issuing an order adopting the rule on disqualification, the members of this Court should seriously consider the following amendments to MCR 2.003. They are designed primarily to assure minimal due process and to clarify the procedures used when this Court reviews as an appellate body a Justice's decision to deny a motion for recusal. I will discuss in turn my reasons for proposing each of the amendments. I provide at the conclusion of this memo the entire rule as voted on November 5, 2009, containing all of my proposed amendments in redline.
PROPOSED DUE PROCESS AMENDMENTS
. As discussed at our last ADM conference, I believe that the timing requirement for filing disqualification motions in the Supreme Court requires more precision than the language contained in Justice Hathaway's proposal specified. (This is the subject matter of my "friendly amendment" offered before our vote on Justice Hathaway's proposal.) I have split the "Time for Filing" subsection into four parts (subsections (D)(1) through (D)(4)). There is proposed one subsection for procedures respectively in the trial court, the Court of Appeals, and this Court, and a fourth subsection concerning the effect of an untimely motion. Consistent with my proposal at conference, I have specified that the appellant must file a motion for disqualification with the application if the appellant knows the basis for disqualification at that point and that the appellee must file a motion for disqualification within 28 days of the application if the appellee then knows the basis for disqualification. That way, we are aware of potential grounds for disqualification before acting on the application for leave to appeal. I would also retain the previous language concerning the effect of an untimely proposal and specify that a judge shall not consider a motion made after a case has already been decided. (I previously provided Justice Hathaway with language similar to this proposal, but she has not responded; this language is slightly revised from that that I supplied to her right after the last ADM conference.)
. I would clarify that, when the rule refers to an appeal on disqualification being decided by "the entire Court," this includes the challenged justice. This is already implied in the plain text of the current rule -- "[t]he entire Court shall then decide the motion for disqualification de novo" -- and so my revisions would merely clarify the rule as enacted. These clarifications are contained in subsection (D)(6) (b). If this proposal is repudiated, and a targeted justice is ineligible to hear any appeal on a motion for disqualification, there is the possibility, when multiple justices are targeted, that an appeal on disqualification will run afoul of the quorum requirement of MCL 600.211(3), requiring "a majority of justices… for hearing cases and transacting business."
. I continue strongly to support Justice Markman's demand for transparency in the disqualification process. A disqualification matter to be decided under the new rule as an appeal to the entire Court is not one on the merits and thus is not subject to the same kind of confidentiality that attends our merit discussions of pending appeals. Accordingly, I would expressly require that any appeal to the entire Court on a motion for disqualification be heard and decided in an open session of this Court. This procedure is contained in subsection (D)(6)(b)(ii).
. The removal of a sitting Justice against his or her will is a serious matter trenching upon the right to execute the duties of office to which the Justice was elected as well as an infringement on the right of electors who placed the Justice in office. Heretofore, only an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States could reverse a Justice's determination regarding a motion to disqualify. In interposing itself in this decision as an appellate body, this Court must afford the targeted Justice no fewer rights than he enjoyed in such an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States on a denial of a motion to disqualify. I would clarify that a justice subject to a motion for disqualification is entitled to basic due process rights: that the appeal is limited to the grounds stated in the motion for recusal and that the justice be allowed to retain counsel in the matter and submit a brief in response to the motion for disqualification. The procedural requirements for filing such a brief are consistent with the filing of reply briefs in the Court of Appeals and this Court. These proposals are contained in subsections (D)(6)(b)(i) and (ii).
. If due process means anything -- particularly in the disqualification setting where this issue is pivotal -- a targeted Justice is most assuredly entitled to an impartial  arbiter. 1  Where personal and political biases could affect the decision-making of members of this Court in the new disqualification appeal process, I cannot imagine that due process demands less than the right to challenge such potential biases of the decision-makers in this appellate procedure. Therefore, I would amend the rule to ensue that this cardinal due process right is preserved, such that a targeted justice facing an appellate review of his refusal to disqualify can challenge the potential biases of other members of this Court. The substance of this rule is consistent with Justice Markman's failed motion at the last ADM discussion. However, I have provided specific procedural requirements for a judge to challenge the decision-maker in such an appeal. This is contained in subsection (D)(6)(b)(iii).
. Due process also demands an adequate opportunity for a challenged justice to be heard. 2  Sometimes, this will entail an evidentiary hearing. I have therefore proposed a procedure for this Court taking evidence, contained in subsection (D)(6)(b)(ii).
. I continue to be concerned with the First Amendment implications of our new recusal rules. I propose amending subsection (C)(2)(b) to provide that "A judge is not disqualified based solely upon campaign speech protected by Republican Party of Minn v White, 536 U.S. 765; 122 S. Ct. 2528; 153 L. Ed. 2d 694 (2002)." This is consistent with Justice Cavanagh's previous recommended revision. Moreover, to keep our court rules in accordance with the White decision, I have specified that campaign speech shall not be the basis for recusal under the "appearance of impropriety" standard in the former subsection (C)(1)(b)(ii), which I propose to be renumbered (C)(1)(c).
. I would clarify when Caperton requires a justice's disqualification by using further language consistent with the decision. This is contained in subsection (C)(1)(b).
 . I would clarify the procedure by which a justice may challenge another justice's participation in a particular case. I propose amending subsection (B) expressly to allow a justice to raise another justice's participation in a case, and the procedure required to challenge another justice's participation is parallel with the procedure required of a party and is provided in subsection (D)(3). The obligation to challenge arises when a justice becomes aware of the basis for disqualification in a particular case.
. I would specify that a judge may not be subject to disqualification simply because the parties agree among themselves that the judge should be disqualified. I propose adding a new subsection (B)(2)(c) to address this situation.
. Finally, while I do not object to changing the term "remittal" to "waiver" in the new subsection (E), I believe the language in the current rule provides more protection for the parties and a more structured procedural mechanism than the provision as revised. In particular, the previous language specified that parties may not waive a judge's participation in the face of personal bias or prejudice and that the waiver must be made out of the presence of the judge. I cannot think of a single justification for asking parties to waive a judge's actual bias and believe that the draftsman of the revised provision inadvertently omitted this language from the current rule in attempting to restate it. Therefore, I would retain the current language in the rule.
I have indicated in redline my proposed amendments to the rule. The baseline language in subsection (D)(1) is the language that Justice Hathaway initially proposed as the deadline for filing a motion for disqualification, but which was agreed to be reworked at our next ADM conference.
 THE RULE VOTED ON WITH JUSTICE YOUNG'S PROPOSED AMENDMENTS  
Rule 2.003 Disqualification of Judge
(A) Applicability. This rule applies to all judges, including justices of the Michigan Supreme Court, unless a specific provision is stated to apply only to judges of a certain court. The word "judge" includes a justice of the Michigan Supreme Court.
(B) Who May Raise. A party may raise the issue of a judge's disqualification by motion or the judge may raise it. Any justice on the Supreme Court may raise the issue of another justice's disqualification when grounds in a particular case become known.
(C) Grounds. A judge is disqualified when the judge cannot impartially hear a case, including but not limited to instances in which:
(1) Disqualification of a judge is warranted for reasons that include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) The judge is biased or prejudiced for or against a party or attorney.
(b) The judge, based on objective and reasonable perceptions, has [O>either (i)<O] a serious risk of actual bias impacting the due process rights of a party when a person with a personal stake in a particular case had a significant and disproportionate influence in placing the judge on the case by raising funds or directing the judge's election campaign when the case was pending or imminent, as enunciated in Caperton v Massey, 556 U.S. 868, 129 S. Ct. 2252, 173 L. Ed. 2d 1208 (2009),.
(c) The judge, based on objective and reasonable perceptions, [O>or (ii)<O] has failed to adhere to the appearance of impropriety standard set forth in Canon 2 of the Michigan Code of Judicial Conduct. Recusal shall not be required under this section based on a judge's campaign speech.
([O>e<O]d) The judge has personal knowledge of disputed evidentiary facts concerning the proceeding.
([O>d<O]e) The judge has been consulted or employed as an attorney in the matter in controversy.
([O>e<O]f) The judge was a partner of a party, attorney for a party, or a member of a law firm representing a party within the preceding two years.
([O>f<O]g) The judge knows that he or she, individually or as a fiduciary, or the judge's spouse, parent, or child wherever residing, or any other member of the judge's family residing in the judge's household, has more than a de minimis economic interest in the subject matter in controversy that could be substantially impacted by the proceeding.
([O>g<O]h) The judge or the judge's spouse, or a person within the third degree of relationship to either of them, or the spouse of such a person:
(i) is a party to the proceeding, or an officer, director or trustee of a party;
(ii) is acting as a lawyer in the proceeding;
(iii) is known by the judge to have a more than a de minimis interest that could be substantially affected by the proceeding; or
(iv) is to the judge's knowledge likely to be a material witness in the proceeding.
(2) Disqualification Not Warranted.
(a) A judge is not disqualified merely because the judge's former law clerk is an attorney of record for a party in an action that is before the judge or is associated with a law firm representing a party in an action that is before the judge.
 (b) A judge is not disqualified based solely upon campaign speech protected by Republican Party of Minn v White, 536 U.S. 765; 122 S. Ct. 2528; 153 L. Ed. 2d 694 (2002). [O>so long as such speech does not demonstrate bias or prejudice or an appearance of bias or prejudice for or against a party or an attorney involved in the action.<O]
([O>b<O])(c) A judge shall not be subject to disqualification based solely on the agreement of the parties.
(D) Procedure.
(1) Time for Filing in the Trial Courts. [O>For motions in the trial court.<O] To avoid delaying trial and inconveniencing witnesses, if a party is aware of a basis for a motion to disqualify a judge before filing its initial pleading, the party must file a motion to disqualify with the initial pleading. Otherwise, the party must file a motion to disqualify [O>be filed<O] within 14 days after the moving party discovers the ground for disqualification. If the discovery is made within 14 days of the trial date, the motion must be made forthwith. [O>All motions in the Court of Appeals must be filed within 28 days of the disclosure to the parties of the judge's assignment to the case or within 28 days of the discovery of the grounds for disqualification, whichever is later. All motions in the Supreme Court  must be filed within 28 days of the order granting leave or oral argument on the application for leave, or within 28 days of the discovery of the grounds for disqualification, whichever is later. Untimely motions in the trial court. Court of Appeals or Supreme Court may be granted for good cause shown.<O]
(2) Time for Filing in the Court of Appeals. If a party is aware of a basis for a motion to disqualify a Court of Appeals judge assigned to adjudicate the appellant's case, the party must file a motion to disqualify within 14 days after receiving notice of the judges assigned to the appellant's case. Otherwise, a party must file a motion to disqualify within 14 days after the party discovers or should have discovered the basis for disqualification. If a party discovers the basis for disqualification within 14 days before a scheduled oral argument or argument on the application for leave to appeal, the motion must be made forthwith.
(3) Time for Filing in the Supreme Court. If an appellant is aware of a basis for a motion to disqualify a justice before the application for leave is filed, the appellant must file a motion to disqualify with the application. Otherwise, the appellant must file a motion to disqualify within 28 days after the appellant discovers or should have discovered the basis for disqualification. If an appellee is aware of a basis for a motion to disqualify a justice, the appellee must file a motion to disqualify within 28 days after the application is filed. Otherwise, an appellee must file a motion to disqualify within 28 days after the appellee discovers or should have discovered the basis for disqualification. If any party discovers the basis for disqualification within 28 days before a scheduled oral argument or argument on the application for leave to appeal, the motion must be made forthwith.
If a justice is aware of a basis of another justice's disqualification when an application for leave is filed, the justice must raise this question before the order to enter date. Otherwise, a justice must raise the issue of disqualification within 2,8 days after the justice discovers or should have discovered the basis for disqualification. If a justice discovers the basis for disqualification within 28 days before a scheduled oral argument or argument on the claim or application for leave to appeal, the issue must be raised forthwith.
[O>(1)<O](4) Effect of Untimely Motion. If a motion is not timely filed in the trial court, the Court of Appeals, or the Supreme Court, untimeliness, including delay in waiving jury trial, is a factor in deciding whether the motion should be granted. No judge shall consider a motion filed after an order resolving the case has been entered.
(5[O>2<O]) All Grounds to be Included; Affidavit. in any motion under this rule, the moving party must include all grounds for disqualification that are known at the time the motion is filed. An affidavit must accompany the motion.
(6[O>3<O]) Ruling.
(a) For courts other than the Supreme Court, the challenged judge shall decide the motion. If the challenged judge denies the motion,
(i) in a court having two or more judges, on the request of a party, the challenged judge shall refer the motion to the chief judge, who shall decide the motion de novo;
 (ii) in a single-judge court, or if the challenged judge is the chief judge, on the request of a party, the challenged judge shall refer the motion to the state court administrator for assignment to another judge, who shall decide the motion de novo.
(b) In the Supreme Court, if a justice's participation in a case is challenged by a written motion or if the issue of participation is raised by the justice himself or herself or another justice, the challenged justice shall decide the issue and publish his or her reasons about whether to participate. If the challenged justice denies the motion for disqualification, a party may move for the motion to be decided by the entire Court.
 (i) The entire Court, including the justice who is the subject of the appeal and any other justice whose participation is challenged in the case, except a justice removed pursuant to subsection (iii). shall then decide the motion for disqualification de novo. In deciding the motion for disqualification, the Court shall be limited to the grounds raised in the motion itself. The Court's decision shall include the reasons for its grant or denial of the motion for disqualification. A justice may only be disqualified from a case upon the vote of a majority of all justices on the Court. The Court shall issue a written order containing a statement of reasons for its grant or denial of the motion for disqualification. Any concurring or dissenting statements shall be in writing, including that of the challenged justice.
(ii) Upon motion by the challenged justice, the Court shall conduct an evidentiary hearing, governed by the Michigan Court Rules and the Michigan Rules of Evidence, to determine any material facts necessary to the resolution of the motion for disqualification. Any appeal on the motion for disqualification decided by the entire Court. including any evidentiary hearing, must be made in an open session of the Court. The challenged justice may retain counsel and file a brief in response to the motion to appeal denial of disqualification. The responsive brief must be filed and served within 21 days after the party moving for disqualification appeals the justice's decision to deny the motion for disqualification.
([O>i<O])(iii) Any appeal on the motion for disqualification must be resolved by a neutral arbiter following the Michigan Court Rules and the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The justice may challenge the participation of any justice to hear an appeal on the motion for disqualification by indicating the basis for any such disqualification of any other justice sitting on the appeal. Such claim of disqualification of a justice is subject to the procedures contained in this rule and shall be resolved in accordance with the appropriate substantive rules for disqualification prior to any decision on the appeal of the original motion for disqualification.
(74) If Disqualification Motion Is Granted.
(a) For courts other than the Supreme Court, when a judge is disqualified, the action must be assigned to another judge of the same court, or, if one is not available, the state court administrator shall assign another judge.
(b) In the Supreme Court, when a justice is disqualified, the underlying action will be decided by the remaining justices of the Court.
(E) Waiver of Disqualification. If it appears that there may be grounds for disqualification the judge may ask the parties and their lawyers to consider, out of the presence of the judge, whether to waive disqualification. If, following disclosure of any basis for disqualification other than personal bias or prejudice concerning a party, the parties without participation by the judge, all agree that the judge should not be disqualified, and the judge is then willing to participate, the judge may participate in the proceedings. The agreement shall be in writing or placed on the record. [O>Parties to the proceeding may waive disqualification even where it appears that there may be grounds for disqualification of the judge. Such waiver may occur whether the grounds for disqualification were raised by a party or by the judge, so long as the judge is willing to participate. Any agreement to waive disqualification must be made by all parties to the litigation and shall be in writing or placed on the record.<O]
 EXHIBIT C
 MEMORANDUM
TO: The Justices
cc: Corbin Davis & Mike Schmedlen
FROM: Justice Robert P. Young, Jr.
RE: ADM 2009-04, Disqualification
DATE: December 7, 2009
For the convenience of members of the Court, I am reprinting, below, all of my proposed amendments to MCR 2.003. In addition to the amendments that I proposed on November 19, 2009, I include my proposed amendments to the deadline for filing a motion, circulated to the Court on December 4, 2009, and Justice Markman's proposed amendments, circulated to the Court this morning. I also reprint my initial explanations for these proposed amendments, as refined to include the more recent proposals.
PROPOSED DUE PROCESS AMENDMENTS
. I have split the "Time for Filing" subsection into four parts (subsections (D)(1) through (D)(4)). There is proposed one subsection for procedures respectively in the trial court, the Court of Appeals, and this Court, and a fourth subsection concerning the effect of an untimely motion. As to motions in this Court, I have specified that the appellant must file a motion for disqualification with the application if the appellant knows the basis for disqualification at that point. All other motions must be filed with 28 days of discovery of the grounds for disqualification. That way, we are aware of potential grounds for disqualification before acting on the application for leave to appeal. I would also retain the previous language concerning the effect of an untimely proposal.
. Additionally, I believe that we should require a party to file a motion to disqualify as soon as it is aware of a basis for disqualification -- particularly on the eve of trial or oral arguments -- and I want the rule to specify this. Justice Hathaway's proposed language already maintains this requirement for motions in the trial court: my proposed language would provide parallel requirements for the Court of Appeals and Supreme Court.
. I would clarify that, when the rule refers to an appeal on disqualification being decided by "the entire Court," this includes the challenged justice. This is already implied in the plain text of the current rule -- "[t]he entire Court shall then decide the motion for disqualification de novo" -- and so my revisions would merely clarify the rule as enacted. These clarifications are contained in subsection (D)(6)(b). If this proposal is repudiated, and a targeted justice is ineligible to hear any appeal on a motion for disqualification, there is the possibility, when multiple justices are targeted, that an appeal on disqualification will run afoul of the quorum requirement of MCL 600.211(3), requiring "a majority of justices…for hearing cases and transacting business."
. I continue strongly to support Justice Markman's demand for transparency in the disqualification process. A disqualification matter to be decided under the new rule as an appeal to the entire Court is not one on the merits and thus is not subject to the same kind of confidentiality that attends our merit discussions of pending appeals. Accordingly, I would expressly require that any appeal to the entire Court on a motion for disqualification be heard and decided in an open session of this Court. This procedure is contained in subsection (D)(6)(b)(ii).
. The removal of a sitting Justice against his or her will is a serious matter trenching upon the right to execute the duties of office to which the Justice was elected as well as an infringement on the right of electors who placed the Justice in office. Heretofore, only an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States could reverse a Justice's determination regarding a motion to disqualify. In interposing itself in this decision as an appellate body, this Court must afford the targeted Justice no fewer rights than he enjoyed in such an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States on a denial of a motion to disqualify. I would clarify that a justice subject to a motion for disqualification is entitled to basic due process rights: that the appeal is limited to the grounds stated in the motion for recusal and that the justice be allowed to retain counsel in the matter and submit a brief in response to the motion for disqualification. The procedural requirements for filing such a brief are consistent with the filing of reply briefs in the Court of Appeals and this Court. These proposals are contained in subsections (D)(6)(b)(i) and (ii).
. If due process means anything -- particularly in the disqualification setting where this issue is pivotal -- a targeted Justice is most assuredly entitled to an impartial arbiter. 1  Where personal and political biases could affect the decision-making of members of this Court in the new disqualification appeal process, I cannot imagine that due process demands less than the right to challenge such potential biases of the decision-makers in this appellate procedure. Therefore, I would amend the rule to ensue that this cardinal due process right is preserved, such that a targeted justice facing an appellate review of his refusal  to disqualify can challenge the potential biases of other members of this Court. The substance of this rule is consistent with Justice Markman's failed motion at the last ADM discussion. However, I have provided specific procedural requirements for a judge to challenge the decision-maker in such an appeal. This is contained in subsection (D)(6)(b)(iii).
. Due process also demands an adequate opportunity for a challenged justice to be heard. 2  Sometimes, this will entail an evidentiary hearing. I have therefore proposed a procedure for this Court taking evidence, contained in subsection (D)(6)(b)(ii).
. I continue to be concerned with the First Amendment implications of our new recusal rules. I propose amending subsection (C)(2)(b) to provide that "A judge is not disqualified based solely upon campaign speech protected by Republican Party of Minn v White, 536 U.S. 765; 122 S. Ct. 2528; 153 L. Ed. 2d 694 (2002)." This is consistent with Justice Cavanagh's previous recommended revision. Moreover, to keep our court rules in accordance with the White decision, I have specified that campaign speech shall not be the basis for recusal under the "appearance of impropriety" standard in the former subsection (C)(1)(b)(ii), which I propose to be renumbered (C)(1)(c).
 . I would clarify when Caperton requires a justice's disqualification by using further language consistent with the decision. This is contained in subsection (C)(1)(b).
. I would clarify the procedure by which a justice may challenge another justice's participation in a particular case. I propose amending subsection (B) expressly to allow a justice to raise another justice's participation in a case, and the procedure required to challenge another justice's participation is parallel with the procedure required of a party and is provided in subsection (D)(3), The obligation to challenge arises when a justice becomes aware of the basis for disqualification in a particular case.
. I would specify that a judge may not be subject to disqualification simply because the parties agree among themselves that the judge should be disqualified. I propose adding a new subsection (B)(2)(c) to address this situation.
. Finally, while I do not object to changing the term "remittal" to "waiver" in the new subsection (E), I believe the language in the current rule provides more protection for the parties and a more structured procedural mechanism than the provision as revised. In particular, the previous language specified that parties may not waive a judge's participation in the face of personal bias or prejudice and that the waiver must be made out of the presence of the judge. I cannot think of a single justification for asking parties to waive a judge's actual bias and believe that the draftsman of the revised provision inadvertently omitted this language from the current rule in attempting to restate it. Therefore, I would retain the current language in the rule.
  I have indicated in redline my proposed amendments to the rule as it appears in the Court's November 25, 2009 order (as amended with the Court's December 3, 2009 order).
 THE NOVEMBER 25, 2009 ORDER (AS AMENDED DECEMBER 3, 2009) WITH JUSTICE YOUNG'S PROPOSED AMENDMENTS  
Rule 2.003 Disqualification of Judge
(A) Applicability. This rule applies to all judges, including justices of the Michigan Supreme Court, unless a specific provision is stated to apply only to judges of a certain court. The word "judge" includes a justice of the Michigan Supreme Court.
(B) Who May Raise. A party may raise the issue of a judge's disqualification by motion or the judge may raise it. Any justice on the Supreme Court may raise the issue of another justice's disqualification when grounds in a particular case become known.
(C) Grounds.
(1) Disqualification of a judge is warranted for reasons that include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) The judge is biased or prejudiced for or against a party or attorney.
(b) The judge, based on objective and reasonable perceptions, has [O>either (i)<O] a serious risk of actual bias impacting the due process rights of a party when a person with a personal stake in a particular case had a significant and disproportionate influence in placing the judge on the case by raising funds or directing the judge's election campaign when the case was pending or imminent, as enunciated in Caperton v Massey, 556 U.S. 868, 129 S. Ct. 2252, 173 L. Ed. 2d 1208 (2009).
(c) The judge, based on objective and reasonable perceptions, [O>or (ii)<O] has failed to adhere to the appearance of impropriety standard set forth in Canon 2 of the Michigan Code of Judicial Conduct. Recusal shall not be required under this section based on a judge's campaign speech protected by Republican Party of Minnesota v White, 536 U.S. 765; 122 S. Ct. 2528; 153 L. Ed. 2d 694 (2002).
([O>e<O]d) The judge has personal knowledge of disputed evidentiary facts concerning the proceeding.
([O>d<O]e) The judge has been consulted or employed as an attorney in the matter in controversy.
([O>e<O]f) The judge was a partner of a party, attorney for a party, or a member of a law firm representing a party within the preceding two years.
([O>f<O]g) The judge knows that he or she, individually or as a fiduciary, or the judge's spouse, parent, or child wherever residing, or any other member of the judge's family residing in the judge's household, has more than a de minimis economic interest in the subject matter in controversy that could be substantially impacted by the proceeding.
([O>g<O]h) The judge or the judge's spouse, or a person within the third degree of relationship to either of them, or the spouse of such a person:
(i) is a party to the proceeding, or an officer, director or trustee of a party;
(ii) is acting as a lawyer in the proceeding;
(iii) is known by the judge to have a more than a de minimis interest that could be substantially affected by the proceeding; or
(iv) is to the judge's knowledge likely to be a material witness in the proceeding.
 (2) Disqualification Not Warranted.
(a) A judge is not disqualified merely because the judge's former law clerk is an attorney of record for a party in an action that is before the judge or is associated with a law firm representing a party in an action that is before the judge.
(b) A judge is not disqualified based solely upon campaign speech protected by Republican Party of Minn v White, 536 U.S. 765; 122 S. Ct. 2528; 153 L. Ed. 2d 694 (2002), [O>so long as such speech does not demonstrate bias or prejudice or an appearance of bias or prejudice for or against a party or an attorney involved in the action.<O]
 ([O>b<O])(c) A judge shall not be subject to disqualification based solely on the agreement of the parties.
(D) Procedure.
(1) Time for Filing in the Trial Courts. [O>For motions in the trial court, t<O]To avoid delaying trial and inconveniencing witnesses, all[O>a<O] motions [O>to<O]--for disqualification[O>y<O] must be filed within 14 days [O>after<O] of [O>the moving party<O] discovery[O>s<O] of the grounds for disqualification. [O>If the discovery is made within 14 days of the trial date, the motion must be made forthwith. If a motion is not timely filed, untimeliness, including delay in waiving jury trial, is a factor in deciding whether the motion should be granted.<O]
(2) Time for Filing in the Court of Appeals. All motions for disqualification must be filed within 14 days of disclosure of the judges' assignment to the case or within 14 days of the discovery of the grounds for disqualification. If a party discovers the grounds for disqualification within 14 days before a scheduled oral argument or argument on the application for leave to appeal, the motion must be made forthwith.
(3) Time for Filing in the Supreme Court. If an appellant is aware of grounds for disqualification of a justice, the appellant must file a motion to disqualify with the application for leave to appeal. All other motions must be filed within 28 days after the filing of the application for leave to appeal or within 28 days of the discovery of the grounds for disqualification. If a party discovers the grounds for disqualification within 28 days of a scheduled oral argument or argument on the application for leave to appeal, the motion must be made forthwith.
All requests for review by the entire Court pursuant to subsection. (3)(b) must be made within 14 days of the entry of the decision by the individual justice.
If a justice is aware of grounds for disqualification of another justice, the justice must raise the question before the order to enter date. Otherwise, a justice must raise the issue within 28 days after the justice discovers or should have discovered the grounds for disqualification. If a justice discovers the grounds for disqualification within 28 days of a scheduled oral argument or argument on the application for leave to appeal, the issue must be raised forthwith.
[O>(1)<O](4) Untimely Motions. If a motion is not timely filed in the trial court, the Court of Appeals, or the Supreme Court, untimeliness, including delay in waiving jury trial, is a factor in deciding whether the motion should be granted. No judge shall consider a motion filed after an order resolving the case has been entered.
 (5[O>2<O]) All Grounds to be Included; Affidavit. In any motion under this rule, the moving party must include all grounds for disqualification that are known at the time the motion is filed. An affidavit must accompany the motion.
(6[O>3<O]) Ruling.
(a) For courts other than the Supreme Court, the challenged judge shall decide the motion. If the challenged judge denies the motion,
(i) in a court having two or more judges, on the request of a party, the challenged judge shall refer the motion to the chief judge, who shall decide the motion de novo;
(ii) in a single-judge court, or if the challenged judge is the chief judge, on the request of a party, the challenged judge shall refer the motion to the state court administrator for assignment to another judge, who shall decide the motion de novo.
(b) In the Supreme Court, if a justice's participation in a case is challenged by a written motion or if the issue of participation is raised by the justice himself or herself or another justice, the challenged justice shall decide the issue and publish his or her reasons about whether to participate. If the challenged justice denies the motion for disqualification, a party may move for the motion to be decided by the entire Court.
(i) The entire Court, including the justice who is the subject of the appeal and any other justice whose participation is challenged in the case, except a justice removed pursuant to subsection (iii), shall then decide the motion for disqualification de novo. In deciding the motion for disqualification, the Court snail be limited to the grounds raised in the motion itself. The Court's decision shall include the reasons for its grant or denial of the motion for disqualification. A justice may only be disqualified from a case upon the vote of a majority of all justices on the Court, The Court shall issue a written order containing a statement of reasons for its grant or denial of the motion for disqualification. Any concurring or dissenting statements shall be in writing, including that of the challenged justice.
(ii) Upon motion by a justice, the Court shall conduct an evidentiary hearing, governed by the Michigan Court Rules and the Michigan Rules of Evidence, to determine any material facts necessary to the resolution of the motion for disqualification. Any appeal on the motion for disqualification decided by the entire Court, including any evidentiary hearing, must be made in an open session of the Court. The challenged justice may retain counsel and file a brief in response to the motion to appeal denial of disqualification. The responsive brief must be filed and served within 21 days after the party moving for disqualification appeals the justice's decision to deny the motion for disqualification.
[O>(i)<O](iii) Any appeal on the motion for disqualification must be resolved by a neutral arbiter following the Michigan Court Rules and the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The justice may challenge the participation of any justice to hear an appeal on the motion for disqualification by indicating the basis for any such disqualification of any other justice sitting on the appeal. Such claim of disqualification of a justice is subject to the procedures contained in this rule and shall be resolved in accordance with the appropriate substantive rules for disqualification prior to any decision on the appeal of the original motion for disqualification.
(74) If Disqualification Motion Is Granted.
(a) For courts other than the Supreme Court, when a judge is disqualified, the action must be assigned to another judge of the same court, or, if one is not available, the state court administrator shall assign another judge.
(b) In the Supreme Court, when a justice is disqualified, the underlying action will be decided by the remaining justices of the Court.
(E) Waiver of Disqualification. If it appears that there may be grounds for disqualification, the judge may ask the parties and their lawyers to consider, out of the presence of the judge, whether to waive disqualification. If, following disclosure of any basis for disqualification other than personal bias or prejudice concerning a party, the parties without participation by the judge, all agree that the judge should not be disqualified, and the judge is then willing to participate, the judge may participate in the proceedings. The agreement shall be in writing or placed on the record. [O>Parties to the proceeding may waive disqualification even where it appears that there may be grounds for disqualification of the judge. Such waiver may occur whether the grounds for disqualification were raised by a party or by the judge, so long as the judge is willing to participate. Any agreement to waive disqualification must be made by all parties to the litigation and shall be in writing or placed on the record.<O]

 

