).
I concur in this Court's order reversing the Court of Appeals judgment and reinstating defendant's conviction because he waived appellate relief. I write separately to address Justice Cavanagh's dissent.
Defendant sought a court order permitting a privately retained psychologist to examine him while he was in jail for the purpose of evaluating the merits of an insanity defense. Defendant sought the order because he had previously been diagnosed as bipolar and prescribed Prozac, Xanex, and Ritalin. Defendant contended that the court order was necessary because the evaluation would take more time than permitted by ordinary jail visitation hours. The trial court denied defendant's motion, ruling that defendant must first file a notice of intent to assert an insanity defense pursuant to MCL 768.20a(1) and participate in an examination by the Center for Forensic psychiatry 29  before he could obtain an evaluation by his privately retained expert. Defendant did not pursue his insanity defense by filing a ยง 20a(1) notice as directed by the trial court. Instead, defendant abandoned his insanity defense in favor of a mitigation defense. Defendant's mitigation defense proved unsuccessful, as a jury convicted him of first-degree murder.
 The Court of Appeals majority held that the trial court erred by denying defendant's pretrial motion and remanded for further proceedings consistent with its opinion. The prosecutor sought leave to appeal in this Court, and we have reversed the Court of Appeals judgment because defendant waived appellate relief on this issue.
As stated, I concur with this Court's order; the interpretation of MCL 768.20a(1) is moot because defendant intentionally abandoned his right to assert an insanity defense 30  and, therefore, waived relief related to raising that defense on appeal. 31  It is critical that the  trial court's ruling, even if erroneous, did not prohibit defendant from pursuing an insanity defense. 32  Investigation of an insanity defense remained fully available to defendant. That defendant may have been erroneously deprived of an  opportunity for an independent evaluation before filing a ยง 20a(1) notice is irrelevant in light of defendant's subsequent decision to abandon the investigation of his insanity defense. Indeed, the trial court's order expressly instructed defendant that he "has  the right to full access to an evaluation by a clinician of his choosing--at the appropriate time." Thus, the trial court's order neither prohibited defendant from investigating his insanity defense nor obtaining the independent evaluation that his motion sought.
This case is not analogous to a defendant seeking to offer evidence, but being denied the opportunity by an erroneous ruling by the court. Rather, this case is more analogous to a defendant offering evidence and the trial court denying its admission but instructing the defendant that he may introduce the same evidence through another witness. In that situation, if the defendant refuses to call that alternative witness or offer  the evidence through that witness, then he has abandoned his right to present that evidence to the jury and cannot obtain relief on appeal. Indeed, as this Court has instructed, defendant "may not harbor error as an appellate parachute." 33  
Justice Cavanagh suggests that defendant did not waive his insanity defense because after the trial court's ruling he had to choose between two alternatives, each with its own consequences. 34  As Justice Cavanagh explains, however, defendant chose not to submit to the Center for Forensic Psychiatry examination because he wanted to protect the secrecy of his trial strategy. Thus, defendant had a choice to continue pursuing his insanity defense and chose to abandon it as a matter of trial strategy. Waiver is not excused simply because the defendant was faced with a difficult decision and regrets the strategic choice that he made.
Defendant was fully aware that he could file a ยง 20a(1) notice and continue pursuing an insanity defense, but elected to abandon it in favor of a mitigation defense. Defendant cannot obtain appellate relief because his chosen defense strategy failed. Accordingly, I concur in this Court's order reinstating defendant's conviction.
