  
Concur




 YOUNG, J. (concurring).
Because I conclude that defendant is not entitled to the relief that he seeks--an additional 142 days of jail credit--I concur in the denial of leave to appeal. I write only to respond to Chief Justice Kelly's mischaracterization of the relevant issues in this case.
In 2003, defendant was sentenced to three years of probation for retail fraud, with the first year to be served in jail. Defendant subsequently escaped from jail and was later arrested for the escape on January 5, 2004. On May 27, 2004, defendant was sentenced to two years of probation with nine months in jail, to be served consecutively with the remainder of his retail fraud term. After his release from jail, but while still on probation for both offenses, defendant pleaded guilty to violating probation. He was sentenced to two concurrent prison terms for the underlying offenses for which he was on probation at the time, and the trial court subsequently amended the sentence to make the prison terms consecutive. Defendant appealed this resentencing, arguing in his original brief to the Court of Appeals that "[b]ecause of the change from concurrent to consecutive sentencing, [the] Court should remand Mr. Botello's case for a full resentencing." Both the Court of Appeals and this Court had previously denied leave to appeal the trial court's sua sponte resentencing. People v Botello, 480 Mich 1138; 746 N.W.2d 69 (2008). Defendant subsequently filed a motion seeking clarification of his jail credit, which the trial court denied. He now appeals the trial court's ruling on that motion, arguing to this Court that he is not receiving his appropriate amount of jail credit.
Chief Justice Kelly questions the validity of defendant's current sentence, and in doing so appears to be resuscitating defendant's challenge in his previous application for leave to appeal that he must be resentenced. This case, however, only concerns the amount of jail time credit he is entitled to while serving his current sentence, and the lower  courts have correctly decided this issue. Defendant received 344 days credit for his retail fraud sentence and 227 days credit for his escape sentence.
Defendant believes that he is entitled to additional credit for the time between January 5, 2004, when he was incarcerated after his arrest for violating the terms of his probation for retail fraud and for escaping from prison, and his sentencing on May 27, 2004. The amount of time credited toward his retail fraud sentence, however, specifically included this time. Defendant is not entitled to credit on his escape sentence. MCL 750.195(2) provides that a person convicted of escape from prison "shall be imprisoned for the unexpired portion of the term of imprisonment the person was serving at the time of the violation, and any term of imprisonment imposed for the violation of this subsection shall begin to run at the expiration of that prior term of imprisonment." Under the plain terms of this statutory provision, defendant was required to serve his entire jail sentence for retail fraud before beginning to serve his jail sentence for escape.
Because this jail credit issue is the only issue before us, I concur in denying leave to appeal. Defendant has already appealed the validity of the trial court's sua sponte decision to resentence him. Moreover, the defendant has conceded the trial court's interpretation of MCL 750.195(2), thereby accepting that the trial court properly amended his sentences to make them consecutive. 1  Thus, defendant's claim on  this appeal has no merit and Chief Justice Kelly has inappropriately, in my opinion, attempted to revive a stale claim made in defendant's prior appeal and done so even though the defendant has conceded the issue she raises.
CORRIGAN, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.
