 in part and dissenting in part).
I concur with the majority opinion to the extent that it purports to disallow consideration of the concepts of sentencing entrapment, sentencing manipulation, and sentencing escalation. However, I believe that the core tenet espoused by the majority ----that a defendant's so-called "altered intent" may constitute an objective and verifiable factor that may be considered in departing from a statutorily mandated minimum sentence ----is directly contrary to the principles this Court so recently reaffirmed in  People v Babcock, 469 Mich. 247; 666 N.W.2d 231 (2003). Accordingly, although I concur in the majority's decision to remand for resentencing, I dissent from its analysis. 1 
I. CONSIDERATION OF POLICE CONDUCT
Although the majority states that police misconduct, standing alone, is not an appropriate factor to consider at sentencing, it nevertheless allows consideration of any police conduct that can be "objectively and verifiably shown" to have "altered a defendant's intent."  Ante at 1-2. I believe that this is an internally inconsistent holding and that it constitutes an expansion of the substantive defense of entrapment, a judicially created defense that I believe is violative of the doctrine of separation of powers and therefore invalid for the reasons expressed by Chief Justice CORRIGAN in her dissenting statement in People v Maffett 2  and her opinion dissenting in part in the instant case. Not only does the majority's holding permit the inappropriate extrapolation of the substantive entrapment defense into the sentencing context, it broadens the defense in that (1) it permits (indeed, it requires) application of a subjective, rather than objective, assessment of the defendant's response to police conduct, and (2) it does not even require impermissible or reprehensible police conduct, the hallmark of the traditional entrapment defense. 3  Moreover, I agree with Chief Justice CORRIGAN that the rejection of a legislatively mandated sentence requirement based on a court's ad hoc assessment of police conduct impermissibly usurps both legislative and executive authority. See  ante at 6-8.
II. INTENT IS NOT AN "OBJECTIVE" FACTOR
Under former MCL 333.7401(4), a departure from the statutorily mandated minimum ten-year sentence applicable to defendant is permitted if the court has a "substantial and compelling reason" for the departure. In  Babcock, supra, this Court adopted and reaffirmed, as an animating construction of the legislative sentencing guidelines, the People v Fields 4  definition of "substantial and compelling reason": a reason that is both objective and verifiable and that "'keenly'" or "'irresistibly'" grabs the court's attention. 5   Babcock, supra at 257-258, quoting  Fields, supra at 67.
The majority opines that a defendant's "enhanced intent," if it "can be shown in a manner that satisfies the requirements for a sentencing departure as outlined in Babcock," is a factor that may properly be considered in departing from a mandatory minimum sentence. Although the majority does not dispute that intent is inherently subjective, it nevertheless holds that intent, if "shown" or "established" in "an objective and verifiable way," becomes a proper factor for consideration under  Babcock. Ante at 12, 15-16. Thus, the majority presents two hypothetical examples in which evidence, other than the defendant's own representations as to his intent, is presented to support the defendant's claim that his intent was altered before or after he committed a crime; under such circumstances, the majority holds, the defendant's intent has been objectively and verifiably shown. 6   Id.
  The primary flaw in the majority's analysis, in my view, is that it conflates the separate Babcock requirements of objectivity and verifiability into a single evidentiary requirement. Again, Babcock requires that the factor itself be both objective and verifiable. The majority, however, takes the view that if there is an objective and verifiable showing of the existence of a factor, Babcock is satisfied. I disagree.
A subjective factor such as intent is not somehow transformed into an objective factor simply because it can be supported by evidence other than the defendant's own representations. Although the existence of such external evidence might well render a particular factor verifiable, an otherwise subjective factor will remain subjective, even in the face of a mountain of proof. 7  The adoption of the Fields/Babcock test was intended to preclude consideration of such subjective factors. I cannot subscribe to the majority's sub silentio repudiation of the Babcock requirement of objectivity.
 Accordingly, on remand, I would preclude the trial court from considering as a proper sentencing factor defendant's intent.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Maura D. Corrigan
KELLY, J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I agree with Justice Cavanagh's concurrence. However, I do not believe the Court should take a position on the application of Blakely v Washington 1  to Michigan's sentencing scheme. The issue was neither raised nor briefed in this case. It is a jurisprudentially significant issue. I would not decide it without full briefing and oral argument.
Marilyn Kelly 

 

