  
Concur




YOUNG, J., concurs and states as follows:
I join with the order denying leave to appeal. I believe a close inspection of the record reveals that defendant entered into a valid Cobbs (see People v Cobbs, 443 Mich. 276; 505 N.W.2d 208 [1993]) agreement and waived his objection to a scoring error because he "understandingly and voluntarily entered into a plea agreement . . . ." People v Wiley, 472 Mich. 153, 154; 693 N.W.2d 800 (2005). 
At his April 25, 2003, arraignment, defendant solicited a Cobbs evaluation from Judge Kym L. Worthy. The prosecutor supplied what he thought to be the appropriate guidelines range and the judge inquired about defendant's prior convictions and reviewed other factors. Finally, she offered a preliminary assessment that the sentence would be 9 to 15 years and emphasized that that sentence was "exceedingly generous coming from me." Defendant declined to plead to the charge in light of this evaluation at the arraignment.
Defendant's attorney attempted to lower the judge's Cobbs evaluation at a final conference five days later. He noted the defendant's supportive family, good work history, and other mitigating circumstances. Judge Worthy was unpersuaded. She refused to "revisit," i.e., lower, her evaluation and go "any lower than 9 years." The judge said she was "crazy for offering the 9 to 15" as it was "exceedingly lenient, way too lenient, especially for me."
Defendant pleaded no contest on May 5. Defense counsel continued to ask the court to lower the minimum sentence. Although her "mind [was] not closed," Judge Worthy replied that "the chances [of a lower sentence] are very very minimal, highly unlikely."
Judge Worthy imposed a sentence of 9 to 15 years on May 15. Again, she rejected defense counsel's arguments for a reduced sentence because the sentence was "exceedingly fair, it's more than fair." She explained to defendant why the "sentence that I told you I would give you was exceedingly lenient." Several times, Judge Worthy reiterated that "I'm not going any lower than I already have in this case" and "I'm not changing the sentence."
Justice MARKMAN'S contention that defendant only agreed to plead guilty but "did not agree to the sentence imposed" finds no support in the record recounted above. From the beginning of these proceedings, Judge Worthy indicated that defendant would likely receive a 9- to 15-year sentence if he entered a plea. She never wavered from that evaluation despite defense counsel's repeated attempts to have her lower her evaluation. Defendant was under no illusions about the  length of his sentence when he decided to plead no contest. Judge Worthy's statement that she had not closed her mind to a lower sentence does not obviate the Cobbs evaluation. In fact, it finds support in Cobbs, since a Cobbs agreement is always subject to future revision in light of newly introduced information.
A Cobbs plea is a voluntary, noncoercive agreement between the defendant and the sentencing judge. Indeed, the judge cannot offer preliminary impressions on the record until one of the parties requests an  evaluation. Judge Worthy may have relied, in part, on erroneous information when she calculated her evaluation. But defendant was not obliged to accept, i.e., plead no contest. That he did accept, after initially rejecting the offer, suggests he perceived some benefit from the offered sentence.
Further, a Cobbs plea necessarily contains a sentencing component. As occurred in this case, the defendant pleads guilty or no contest in reliance on a particular sentence offered by the sentencing judge. This trade-off is the essence of a Cobbs plea. If the defendant is not agreeing to a specific sentence in a Cobbs plea, then there could be no justification for giving the defendant the "absolute right" to withdraw the plea if the judge exceeds his or her preliminary evaluation. Cobbs, 443 Mich. at 283. Thus, Justice MARKMAN has made a distinction that cannot be squared with the very theory of a Cobbs plea.
For this reason, I agree with the majority's order to deny leave to appeal.
CORRIGAN, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.  
