 (In Part)  
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
A majority of justices today reach the correct conclusion that there may be circumstances in a criminal case that support introducing evidence of a victim's intoxication in order to show gross negligence. I concur in this portion of the lead opinion.
However, while I concur in the decision to grant defendant a new trial, I dissent from the gratuitous decision to overrule People v Derror. 1  The decision to  overrule Derror redounds only to the benefit of a marijuana abuser who gets behind the wheel of a motor vehicle. In enacting MCL 333.7212, the Legislature made the policy decision to include marijuana "and every . . . derivative" of marijuana 2  in the list of schedule 1 controlled substances. The Legislature, furthermore, forbade anyone to operate a motor vehicle with "any amount" of a schedule 1 controlled substance--such as a derivative  of marijuana--in his or her body. 3  The decision to overrule Derror and rule that the metabolite 11-carboxy-tetrahydrocannabinol (11-carboxy-THC) is not a "derivative" of marijuana nullifies this clear legislative intent. In overruling Derror, a majority of justices usurp the role of policymaker from the people and their elected representatives and enact a policy contrary to that articulated in Michigan's controlled substances statutes. Even worse, because there is undisputed evidence that this defendant had trace amounts of actual tetrahydrocannabinol in his system, a majority of justices have used this case as a vehicle to overrule a decision with which they disagree even though there is plainly no reason to reach this question. This is a type of judicial overreach and activism of the worst kind.
Accordingly, I dissent from the conclusion that 11-carboxy-THC is not a derivative of marijuana within the meaning of Michigan's controlled substance laws. I likewise dissent from the decision to overrule Derror.
I. MICHIGAN'S CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE LAWS
MCL 257.625(8) forbids any person to "operate a vehicle . . . if the person has in his or her body any  amount of a controlled substance listed in schedule 1 under . . . MCL 333.7212 . . . ." MCL 333.7212(1)(c) lists "marihuana" as a schedule 1 controlled substance. The Public Health Code, within which MCL 333.7212(1)(c) appears, defines "marihuana" as
all parts of the plant Canabis [sic] sativa L., growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. 4 
Tetrahydrocannabinol, or "THC," is the main psychoactive substance found in the cannabis plant, 5  and it is undisputed that THC is a schedule 1 controlled substance. 6  The body produces 11-carboxy-THC when it metabolizes THC. Accordingly, it is a "metabolite" of THC. 7  In Derror, this Court addressed whether 11-carboxy-THC, as a metabolite of THC, is also a "derivative" of THC. 8  Because "derivative" is undefined in the Public Health Code, the Court in Derror used medical dictionaries to define the term and thereby determine whether 11-carboxy-THC is a derivative of THC. 9  
The Court in Derror properly concluded that the term "derivative" encompasses metabolites. Although medical dictionaries define multiple senses of the term "derivative," the Court determined that the definition  "chemical substance related structurally to another substance and theoretically derivable from it," contained in Merriam-Webster's Online Medical Dictionary, best effectuates the Legislature's  intent. 10  In applying this definition, the Court concluded that 11-carboxy-THC is a derivative because "it has an identical chemical structure to THC except for the eleventh carbon atom." 11  
II. THE DECISION TO OVERRULE DERROR IS A RETREAT FROM STARE DECISIS
A majority of justices today overrule Derror and conclude that 11-carboxy-THC is not a derivative of THC. In doing so, they appear to retreat from their previously stated fidelity to stare decisis. 12  The justices  in the majority can say what they will about their commitment to stare decisis, but the fact that they reach the issue raised in Derror when the facts of this case do not require this Court to address it puts to rest any semblance of principle in their positions. 13  
In deciding whether to overturn a precedent of this Court, "[t]he first question, of course, should be whether the earlier decision was wrongly decided." 14  The lead opinion has not shown that Derror was wrongly decided. In fact, it merely repeats similar arguments offered by the dissent in Derror. These arguments were unpersuasive when Derror was decided, and they remain unpersuasive today.
 First, the lead opinion claims that the Derror Court "failed to interpret MCL 333.7212 in a manner consistent with federal law," 15  as required under MCL 333.1111(1), 16  because "no federal court has held that 11-carboxy- THC is a controlled substance." 17  However, "no federal court has specifically excluded 11-carboxy-THC from the definition of 'marijuana.'" 18  Accordingly, the Derror Court's interpretation of MCL 333.7212 is consistent with federal law. 19  
Second, the lead opinion claims that Derror "ignored other relevant statutory provisions that suggest that 11-carboxy-THC should not be considered a schedule 1 controlled substance." In particular, the lead opinion claims that the Michigan Board of Pharmacy is not required to include 11-carboxy-THC in schedule 1 because the substance does not have "high potential for abuse." 20  This argument is specious. Although MCL 333.7211 mandates the inclusion of certain substances in schedule 1, "[i]t does not prohibit the inclusion of other substances in schedule 1." 21  Moreover, the Legislature expressly listed marijuana as a schedule 1 controlled substance. Because 11-carboxy-THC is a derivative of marijuana, it too constitutes a schedule 1 controlled substance, 22  regardless of whether it "has high potential for abuse" within the meaning of MCL 333.7211.
 Finally, the lead opinion claims that, because the Legislature did not specifically include the terms "11-carboxy-THC" or "metabolite" in the list of schedule 1 controlled substances, it purposely omitted them from that list. This argument is also specious and misses the entire point of the Derror decision: the Legislature expressly listed marijuana in schedule 1 and then specifically defined "marijuana" as including its derivatives. The Legislature should not have to draft a statute in the manner of a person wearing a belt and suspenders, by expressly banning every conceivable iteration and by-product of marijuana in order to protect the citizens of Michigan from people who drive with marijuana and marijuana by-products in their systems.
Because Derror was correctly decided, the decision whether to overrule Derror should end there. However, even if Derror  had been wrongly decided, other relevant factors exist that caution against overruling Derror.
Before overruling a wrongly decided precedent, this Court must consider "whether the decision at issue defies 'practical workability,' whether reliance interests would work an undue hardship, and whether changes in the law or facts no longer justify the questioned decision." 23  None of these factors compel overruling Derror.
Derror does not defy practical workability merely because of the "potential for arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement . . . ." 24  Moreover, the voters' approval of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act 25  is not, as the lead opinion suggests, relevant to deciding whether to overrule Derror. 26  To begin with, legalization of the use  of marijuana for a limited medical purpose cannot be equated with an intent to allow its lawful consumption in conjunction with driving. The lead opinion's argument, taken to its logical extreme, suggests that marijuana itself, not just its derivative, 11-carboxy-THC, should no longer be a schedule 1 controlled substance because of its limited legalization by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. It is clear that the act operates in harmony with existing controlled substances laws, not in place of them. 27  In particular, the act only provides that a "qualifying patient who has been issued and possess a registry identification card shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution, or penalty in any manner . . . for the medical use of marihuana in accordance with this act . . . ." 28  Notably, the act also prohibits the operation of a motor vehicle "while under the influence of marihuana." 29  Finally, the lead opinion expresses concern that Derror impermissibly prohibits
those qualified individuals who lawfully use marijuana in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act . . . from driving for an undetermined length of time given the potential of 11-carboxy-THC to remain in a person's system long after the person has consumed marijuana and is no longer impaired." 30 
This concern is a red herring. The act itself provides: "All other acts and parts of acts inconsistent with this act do not apply to the medical use of marihuana as provided for by this act." 31  Therefore, to the extent the act's prohibition of driving "under the influence" of  prescribed medical marijuana may be narrower than the statutes at issue in this case and the application of Derror, the people of Michigan have determined that the act supersedes Michigan's controlled substances laws. Nevertheless, it does so only vis-a-vis prescribed medical marijuana, not in other circumstances, such as those in the case at bar.
 The lead opinion's denigration of the reliance interests involved in applying Derror is similarly misguided. Some justices in the majority attach significance to the doctrine of "legislative silence" or "acquiescence." 32  But here, the lead opinion's position appears to be inconsistent with this professed adherence to the doctrine that "[i]f a legislature reenacts a statute without modifying a high court's practical construction of that statute, that construction is implicitly adopted." 33  It is noteworthy that the Legislature has reenacted MCL 257.625 four times by amending it since this Court decided Derror. 34  At none of those times did the Legislature amend the provision that forbids a person to operate a  motor vehicle with "any amount of a controlled substance listed in schedule 1 under . . . MCL 333.7212 . . . ." 35  Furthermore, the Legislature has not amended the list of schedule 1 controlled substances since Derror to exclude metabolites of marijuana or 11-carboxy-THC. Thus, for those in the majority who subscribe to the doctrine of legislative acquiescence, the Legislature's multiple reenactments and acquiescence have significance and, accordingly, embarrassingly belie the majority's argument that no reliance interests are involved in overturning Derror.
III. AS THERE WAS ACTUAL THC IN DEFENDANT'S BLOOD, THERE IS NO NEED TO REACH THE QUESTION WHETHER DERIVATIVES ARE WITHIN THE AMBIT OF THE STATUTE
Finally, and perhaps most important, the decision to overrule Derror is simple unnecessary in the instant case. Not only did defendant's blood contain the derivative 11-carboxy-THC, it also contained THC itself. All members of this Court, including those in the majority, agree that having "any amount" of THC in a driver's bloodstream, however slight, is illegal under this statute. Therefore, in a case in which it is undisputed that defendant violated this statute by virtue of the presence of actual THC, it is unnecessary to review whether 11-carboxy-THC is a schedule 1 controlled substance. Consequently, the decision by a majority of justices to overrule Derror should be seen for what it is: an unnecessary and exceedingly aggressive act to kill a case with which the new majority of this Court disagrees.
IV. CONCLUSION.
In enacting MCL 333.7212, the Legislature made the policy decision to include marijuana "and every . . . derivative"  of marijuana 36  in the list of schedule 1 controlled  substances. The Legislature, furthermore, forbade anyone to operate a vehicle with "any amount" of a schedule 1 controlled substance--such as a derivative of marijuana--in his or her body. 37  This Court's decision in Derror correctly determined that the metabolite 11-carboxy-THC is a "derivative" of the marijuana. The determination by the majority of justices to overrule Derror is not only ill considered, but also usurps the clear policy choices of the people of Michigan. It is undisputed that there was actual THC in defendant's bloodstream. Therefore, whether derivatives of THC are also prohibited is not a question that is necessary for this Court to reach in this case. This decision is thus indicative of the new majority's willfulness to overrule cases with which it disagrees. Accordingly, I vigorously dissent from the decision to overrule Derror.
CORRIGAN and MARKMAN, JJ., concurred with YOUNG, J.

 

