  
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
I dissent from the order in this case and instead would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals. The jury instructions properly set forth the correct standards for self-defense and provocation, and I would affirm the defendant's convictions on that basis.
Defendant shot and killed Keith Hoffman, a local drug dealer who had recently stolen money and jewelry from defendant. At issue during trial was whether defendant acted in self-defense. After a jury convicted defendant of second-degree murder and felony-firearm, defendant appealed, claiming that his jury instructions were constitutionally deficient. The Court of Appeals agreed that the jury instructions were erroneous, but concluded that any error was harmless because it "f[ound] it clear beyond a reasonable doubt that a properly instructed jury would have rendered the same verdict." 1  
 The challenged instructions, when considered in their entirety, 2  are not erroneous. The Court of Appeals determined that the jury instructions failed on two grounds: in providing erroneous instructions on provocation as negating self-defense and in lowering the prosecution's burden of proof on self defense. I will consider each of these claims of error seriatim.
PROVOCATION
In People v Riddle, this Court articulated when provocation precludes asserting the justification of self-defense: "the cardinal rule, applicable to all claims of self-defense, is that the killing of another person is justifiable homicide if, under all the circumstances, the defendant honestly and reasonably believes that he is in imminent danger of death or great bodily harm and that it is necessary for him to exercise deadly force." 3  In discussing the rule, this Court expressly addressed provocation: "For example, where a defendant 'invites trouble'. . . his failure to pursue an available, safe avenue of escape might properly be brought to the attention of the factfinder as a factor in determining whether the defendant acted in reasonable self-defense." 4  
Here, the trial court instructed the jury that "a person forfeits self-defense, even if they'd otherwise have it, have that right to it, if they were the first to use deadly force. . . . Nor can a person claim self-defense if they provoked the other person into using deadly force." The trial court continued:
Nor can a person claim self-defense if what they do is confront someone, intending, by their mere presence, to provoke that person into doing something, and then take advantage of it. You have to be without fault. Without fault means that you can't be the first one to use, and you can't provoke the other person into doing it, and you can't set up a situation where what you mean for them to do is to take the first step so that you are then claiming to take the second step.
The Court of Appeals claims that the trial court's instructions were erroneous: "Contrary to the trial court's charge, 'confront[ing] someone, intending, by their mere presence' to provoke an affray does not eliminate one's potential opportunity to invoke a self-defense."
However, the trial court concluded its discussion of self-defense by indicating that the defendant
must fear, actually fear and reasonably fear, that then and there you are about to be killed or seriously injured, or that someone else is. You've got to actually and reasonably believe that the use of deadly force in response, is the only way to fend off that imminent threat. . . . And, the defendant, to have the benefit of the defense, cannot have been the aggressor, which means the first to use deadly force, a person who provoked it, or one who did something to set up a situation where deadly force ends up getting used, and then they in turn get to respond to it and bootstrap into a claim of defense.
 When considered in their entirety, the trial court's instructions to the jury indicated that provocation negates a claim of self-defense. The phrase "by their mere presence" specifically refers to a person "confront[ing] someone" with the intention of "provok[ing]" violence. In some circumstances, a person's mere presence may be sufficiently provocative to eliminate a claim of self-defense. However, the trial court's instruction did not, as the Court of Appeals suggests, indicate that a person's "mere presence" necessarily "eliminate[s] one's potential opportunity to invoke a self-defense." Ultimately, the trial court's instruction, when considered in its entirety, correctly identified the appropriate legal standard.
BURDEN OF PROOF
The Court of Appeals also determined that the trial court erred in articulating the burden of proof associated with a claim of self-defense. This Court's precedent holds that "once the issue of self-defense is injected and evidentially supported, '[t]he burden of proof to exclude the possibility that the killing was done in self-defense, rests on the prosecution.'" 5  
Here, the trial court instructed the jury as follows:
The first thing you have to keep in mind is that the lack of justification has to be proven here. The defendant doesn't have to prove justification. The evidence has to establish the lack of justification. Now, that's an awkward way of saying things. It is talking about proving a negative, which is technically correct, but hard to talk about. Let's turn it around and talk about it positively.
Since it has got to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt, just like you contributed to the murder, that a person did not kill with justification, I'm going to state it this way: If there is a realistic possibility, based upon the evidence presented here, that one or both of the defendants acted in either self-defense or defense of another, then we don't have a murder, if there was a realistic possibility. If, on the other hand, it's not a realistic possibility, no possibility at all, or even just a mere possibility, just a possibility, not a realistic possibility, then murder is back on the table, because then the thing which would eliminate it[,] justification, doesn't exist. 6 
The trial court's instructions made it clear that the lack of justification needs to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt, which is the correct burden of proof. While the trial court's attempt at "turn[ing] it around and talk[ing] about [justification] positively" was inartful, it did not do anything but equate the presence of a "realistic possibility" of justification with the failure to prove lack of justification beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, the trial court correctly stated that the prosecutor bears the burden of disproving justification beyond a reasonable doubt.
CONCLUSION
The trial court did not err in instructing the jury on self defense. Accordingly, the Court of Appeals need not have engaged in a harmless error analysis. Therefore, I would affirm the result of the Court of  Appeals on the alternative grounds that no error occurred.
WEAVER, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.

 

