ing).
I dissent from the majority's conclusion that the 10-year minimum sentence, imposed by the sentencing court pursuant to the repeat criminal sexual conduct (CSC) offender mandatory minimum sentence requirement, 1  represents a departure from  the legislative sentencing guidelines. 2  Instead, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals. The sentence imposed here is excepted from the statutory guidelines and thus the sentencing court is not required to state "substantial and compelling reasons" for the minimum sentence imposed, as the majority now requires.
Defendant was convicted of first-degree CSC for digitally penetrating the vagina of his daughter. Because he previously was convicted of second-degree CSC, he was sentenced as a repeat CSC offender to a minimum of 10 years in prison. 3  On appeal, defendant argued that his 10-year minimum sentence represented an upward departure from the legislative sentencing guidelines and that the sentencing court failed to articulate substantial and compelling reasons to justify the upward departure. 4  The prosecution claimed that defendant's minimum sentence did not constitute a departure because it complied with the repeat CSC offender mandatory minimum sentence requirement, and the Court of Appeals agreed.
MCL 769.34(2)(a) places mandatory minimum sentences within the framework of the legislative sentencing guidelines and provides, in relevant part:
If a statute mandates a minimum sentence for an individual sentenced to the jurisdiction of the department of corrections, the court shall impose sentence in accordance  with that statute. Imposing a mandatory minimum sentence is not a departure under this section. 5 
Thus, the statutory guidelines defer to another statute that specifies a mandatory minimum sentence. "That statute" in this case is MCL 750.520f(1). It creates just such a mandatory minimum sentence for recidivist sex offenders:
If a person is convicted of a second or subsequent offense under [MCL 750.520b, 750.520c, or 750.520d], the sentence imposed under those sections for the second or subsequent offense shall provide for a mandatory minimum sentence of at least 5 years. 6 
Here, defendant's 10-year minimum sentence was "in accordance with" the mandatory minimum sentence of "at least 5 years." Moreover, as the sentencing court imposed "a mandatory minimum sentence"--a sentence of "at least 5 years"--that sentence was not a departure from the guidelines and the court was not required to justify the minimum sentence imposed. Therefore, the sentence imposed by the sentencing court satisfies both MCL 769.34(2)(a) and MCL 750.520f(1), as applied here in conformance with their clear and unambiguous meanings. Yet the majority disagrees; the question is why?
I. THE MAJORITY FAILS TO CONSTRUE THE STATUTE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITS PLAIN LANGUAGE
The majority claims that the mandatory minimum sentence articulated in MCL 750.520f(1) is "5 years," not "at least 5 years," as the statute plainly reads. Such a conclusion is obviously wholly inconsistent with the plain meaning of MCL 750.520f(1), as evidenced by its  grammatical structure, which describes the mandatory minimum sentence required  under that provision as "at least 5 years." The Legislature could have created an absolute "mandatory minimum" sentence of 5 years, but it did not. 7  Instead, by using the phrase "at least" to modify "5 years," the Legislature created an indeterminate "mandatory minimum" sentence for recidivist sex offenders. Under the mandatory minimum sentence, 5 years is the starting point of the minimum sentence, not its upper terminus. Accordingly, a sentencing court must impose a sentence within the indeterminate mandatory minimum sentence of MCL 750.520f(1)--namely, any minimum sentence of 5 years or more--and that sentence "is not a departure" 8  from the legislative sentencing guidelines.
The majority's misinterpretation will not be limited to the statute now before us. In numerous statutes, some covering our most serious crimes, the Legislature has chosen to create an indeterminate, rather than an absolute, mandatory minimum sentence. 9  Under today's decision,  the  majority reads out of our law books the indeterminate nature of these mandatory minimum sentences and replaces those sentences with absolute minimum terms that the Legislature did not enact.
 The majority apparently eschews the clear language of MCL 750.520f(1) because it concludes that the 10-year minimum sentence imposed here would be "contrary to a central purpose of the sentencing guidelines--greater uniformity in sentencing." 10  This rationale will not scour when one considers that the obligation of the judiciary is to apply legislative policies according to the unambiguous words used by the Legislature in the statutes enacted, not according to abstract policy considerations only judges can divine. 11  Whatever the broader policy of the legislative sentencing guidelines, the Legislature directed that a minimum sentence of "at least 5 years" satisfies the particular statute at issue here, MCL 750.520f(1), and that is the policy we must apply. 12  
  II. THE MAJORITY'S MISCONSTRUCTION CREATES AN INCONSISTENCY
Despite the obvious and clear language of MCL 750.520f(1), the majority has inexplicably created its own alternative statute. The majority has similarly deviated from the obvious and clear language of MCL 769.34(2)(a) and created a new, but unexplained, statutory scheme for mandatory minimum sentences.
 The majority determines that an absolute term of 5 years is the "mandatory minimum" for a recidivist sex offender under MCL 750.520f(1). However, the majority also claims that a sentencing court departs from the guidelines when it sentences a defendant to a 5-year minimum term if the lower limit of the defendant's guidelines range is calculated at more than 5 years. 13  This is entirely contrary to MCL 769.34(2)(a), which expressly states that "[i]mposing a mandatory minimum sentence is not a departure under this section." 14  Now the majority compels the sentencing court to justify as a departure a minimum sentence that is excepted from the statutory sentencing guidelines in the first instance.
 The problem with the majority's analysis is this: MCL 769.34(2)(a) specifically provides that the guidelines are not controlling here; rather, the guidelines defer to another statute that includes a mandatory minimum sentence. Yet the majority insists on reverting to the guidelines despite the Legislature's clear directive to the contrary and declines to provide any statutory support for this decision. 15  
Imposing a 10-year minimum sentence for a recidivist sex offender is not a departure from the legislative sentencing guidelines because it is a "mandatory minimum sentence" 16  of "at least 5 years" as provided in MCL 750.520f(1). Accordingly, I dissent and would instead affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Maura D. Corrigan

 

