  
Concur




YOUNG, J. (concurring).
I concur in the decision to deny leave to appeal and write to respond to what I believe is Justice Markman's artificially narrow definition of "conduct"--one that ultimately and ironically would give rape victims fewer privacy interests than prostitutes under the rape shield statute. I do not believe that the statute requires this result. I also write to respond to Chief Justice Kelly's constitutional argument.
I. Factual Background and Procedural History
Because the dissenting statements offered by Chief Justice Kelly and Justice Markman contain significant gaps that fail to capture the ambulatory nature of the defendant's claims of error, I offer the following complete and chronological recitation of the facts and the relevant procedural history of this case.
The complainant child, D.W., has experienced a troubled childhood. When she was three or four years old, her step-grandfather allegedly sexually abused her by fondling her and requiring her to perform fellatio on him. When she was five years old, she moved to Michigan to live with her mother and stepfather (defendant Ricky Allen Parks). There, she admitted to them that she had been sexually abused by her step-grandfather. Defendant recalled:
She had told us the stories about how her grandfather would have her in his bed at night and how he would touch her vaginal areas and then how he would make her touch his--what she called the weenie and how he had . . . her put it in her mouth and talked about it getting sick on her belly and giving her medicines . . . .
D.W.'s mother immediately contacted the Family Independence Agency (FIA) 1  in Owosso, which referred her to a physician. The physical examination conducted by the physician did not rule out fondling. The FIA investigator concluded that D.W. "has either been exposed to an extreme amount of sexual activity or that she has been abused in the past, possibly with threats of physical harm were she to reveal what has taken place." No charges were ever brought against D.W.'s step-grandfather.
By November 2001, D.W. was 10 years old and living with defendant, his then-girlfriend, and five other children. 2  After D.W. exhibited age-inappropriate sexual knowledge and behavior at school, the  school's social worker interviewed her. During that interview, D.W. stated that defendant had touched her in her vaginal area. The social worker then contacted Child Protective Services (CPS) regarding the allegations of sexual abuse. Although defendant denied the allegations, CPS placed D.W. in foster care. Further investigation led to additional details: D.W. claimed that defendant twice followed her into the bathroom at their house and penetrated her, once with one of his fingers into her vagina and the other time with his penis into her mouth. Pursuant to MCL 750.520b, defendant was subsequently charged with two counts of first-degree criminal sexual conduct (CSC-I). 3  
At a motion in limine hearing, the prosecution sought to exclude evidence of the prior allegation that D.W. made against her step-grandfather. Defense counsel opposed the prosecutor's motion, but on narrow grounds--he sought to use the prior allegation "solely for impeachment purposes." He explained that he anticipated asking D.W. whether "she had ever made any reports of any other types of activity . . . ." He expected "that [D.W.] would say no," as she did at a preliminary hearing, and he would then call other witnesses to testify that she had, in fact, previously made an allegation of sexual abuse. Thus, the then-11-year-old complainant would be impeached. The trial court agreed with the prosecution and excluded the evidence under the rape shield statute. 4  Trial proceeded without evidence of D.W.'s previous abuse, and the jury convicted defendant on both charged counts of CSC-I. He was subsequently sentenced to a term of 7 to 15 years' imprisonment.
On appeal, defendant argued that he should have been allowed to question D.W. to show that she had made similar false allegations in the  past. 5  The Court of Appeals, in an unpublished opinion per curiam, issued May 18, 2004 (Docket No. 244553), affirmed defendant's convictions and held that defendant failed to make an offer of proof with respect to the falsity of D.W.'s prior allegation, as required under MRE 103(a)(2). 6  Undeterred by the defendant's failure to offer proof at the appropriate time, this Court accepted his  argument and remanded to the Shiawassee Circuit Court for an evidentiary hearing to determine whether D.W. had, in fact, made a false accusation of sexual abuse against another person. 7  
On remand, the trial court affirmed defendant's convictions, ruling that there was "absolutely no evidence, zero evidence[,] of any prior false accusations made by the child. . . ." This finding was based on the FIA investigator's determination, contemporaneous with D.W.'s allegation of abuse against her step-grandfather, that the young child "ha[d] either been exposed to an extreme amount of sexual activity or . . . ha[d] been abused in the past." Moreover, it was underscored by defendant's own testimony that he believed D.W.'s allegations against her step-grandfather to be true both at the time they were made and presently.
Defendant has abandoned his prior argument and, hoping that his third theory would be the charm, sought to introduce the evidence for yet another purpose: as an alternative explanation for D.W.'s age-inappropriate sexual knowledge and behavior. Under this theory, defendant now claims that he is entitled to present evidence of the previous abuse D.W. suffered to show that she obtained her age-inappropriate sexual knowledge and behavior from a source other than defendant.
Obviously, at the time of trial, defendant did not offer this third basis for the admission of D.W.'s alleged prior sexual abuse. Accordingly, this issue is unpreserved. Neither Justice Markman nor Chief Justice Kelly explains why the defendant should be allowed to maintain a theory of innocence that was neither articulated at the time of trial nor at the time of the defendant's first appeal to this Court. Indeed, the tortuous procedural history of this case--including the defendant's seriatim efforts to introduce the excluded evidence--is conspicuously absent from either of their dissenting statements. The failure to preserve the appropriate claim of error is, by itself, a sufficient--and my primary--basis for denial.
II. Analysis 
A. Rape Shield Statute
Michigan's rape shield statute, 8  enacted in 1974 as part of a comprehensive reform of Michigan's criminal sexual assault statutes, 9  is a broad exclusionary rule that prohibits the introduction of evidence of a sexual assault victim's previous sexual conduct, with certain narrow exceptions. Before the rape shield statute was enacted, sexual assault trials often focused on a victim's sexual history rather than on the defendant's alleged actions. 10  Thus, as  this Court has previously explained, the enactment of rape shield laws across the country was "a reflection of a nationwide concern about the prosecution of sexual conduct cases." 11  
The rape shield statute, MCL 750.520j, provides in part:
(1) Evidence of specific instances of the victim's sexual conduct . . . shall not be admitted under [MCL 750.520b to 750.520g] unless and only to the extent that the judge finds that the following proposed evidence is material to a fact at issue in the case and that its inflammatory or prejudicial nature does not outweigh its probative value:
 (a) Evidence of the victim's past sexual conduct with the actor.
(b) Evidence of specific instances of sexual activity showing the source or origin of semen, pregnancy, or disease.
At issue in this case is whether prior involuntary sexual activity--the sexual abuse D.W. allegedly suffered by her step-grandfather--constitutes "sexual conduct" for the purposes of the statute's exclusionary rule. If such involuntary sexual activity does constitute "sexual conduct," then the defendant is not entitled to question the complainant about such conduct. This includes a complainant's previous allegations of sexual abuse not proven to be false. 12  
The Legislature did not specifically define the term "conduct." Therefore, it is appropriate to look to the dictionary definition to discern the term's meaning. 13  "Conduct" is relevantly defined, as one's "personal behavior." 14  This definition is silent about whether "conduct" encompasses only voluntary "personal behavior" or both voluntary and involuntary "personal behavior." The term's plain meaning in the criminal context, however, implies that both voluntary behavior and involuntary behavior are "conduct." Justice Markman's understanding of the term "conduct" artificially restricts the term to one's voluntary behavior only. Instead, it encompasses all of one's "personal behavior." 15  
  An examination of the statutory scheme as a whole underscores why Justice Markman's construction of "conduct" is too limited. MCL 750.520a provides definitions for Chapter LXXVI of the Michigan Penal Code, which encompasses the rape shield statute (MCL 750.520j). Although the section does not define the word "conduct," it does define both "actor" and "victim" with reference to their "conduct." An "actor" is someone "accused of criminal sexual conduct," MCL 750.520a(a), while a "victim" is someone "subjected to criminal sexual conduct," MCL 750.520a(p). By including these definitions, the Legislature expressed its understanding that "sexual conduct" is something that both "actors" and "victims" take part in--"actors" voluntarily and "victims" involuntarily. The protections of the rape shield statute, therefore, do not distinguish involuntary "sexual conduct" experienced as a victim of sexual abuse from voluntary "sexual conduct" engaged in as a consenting adult. To hold otherwise would presume that the Legislature intended to give prostitutes more protection than rape victims. I do not think the plain meaning of the term "conduct" within the context of the statute conveys that particular legislative intent.
Moreover, a discarded draft of this provision supports this natural construction of the phrase "sexual conduct." "[B]y comparing alternate legislative drafts, a court may be able to discern the intended meaning for the language actually enacted." 16  The bill, as introduced in the Senate on February 28, 1974, originally provided that "[p]rior consensual sexual activity between the victim and any person other than the actor shall not be admitted into evidence in prosecutions under sections 520B to 5201." 17  The House subsequently amended the bill and passed a substitute bill that deleted the word "consensual." 18  It is that House substitute bill that was enacted into law instead of the bill that was initially proposed. 19  Therefore, the fact that the Legislature specifically deleted the word "consensual" provides additional support for the conclusion that the rape shield statute applies to both consensual and nonconsensual sexual conduct. 20  
  This is consistent with our caselaw applying the rape shield statute to victims of prior sexual abuse. In Arenda, this Court prohibited the admission, under the rape shield statute, of "any evidence of sexual conduct between the victim [an eight-year-old boy] and any person other than defendant." 21  Likewise, People v Morse articulated a specific test for admitting evidence of a complainant's prior sexual abuse notwithstanding the applicability of the rape shield statute. 22  
While not controlling the interpretation of this state's statute, it is nevertheless reassuring that nearly all states ruling on this question have read their rape shield protections as encompassing both voluntary sexual conduct and involuntary sexual conduct. Twenty other states specifically hold that sexual abuse falls under rape shield protections. 23  Only three  states concur with Justice Markman in denying the applicability of rape shield provisions to involuntary sexual abuse. 24  A fourth, New Hampshire, has enacted a statute expressly limiting exclusion to consensual sexual conduct. 25  
Ultimately, there is a strong textual basis for concluding that the term "conduct," as it is used in the rape shield statute, encompasses both voluntary and involuntary behavior. The Legislature's decision to enact a broad exclusionary rule containing  limited and specific exceptions is itself a policy decision, 26  which must be respected unless it is unconstitutional.
B. Constitutional Challenge to the Rape Shield Statute
Notwithstanding the requirements of the rape shield statute, a criminal defendant has the constitutional right to present a defense. The Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution and art 1, § 20, of the Michigan Constitution contain identical provisions giving a criminal defendant the right to "be confronted with the witnesses against him . . . ." 27  In interpreting the Confrontation Clause, the United States Supreme Court maintains that the right to present a defense is a fundamental right afforded to criminal defendants. 28  Nevertheless, it is not absolute. The protections of the Sixth Amendment may "bow to accommodate other legitimate interests in the criminal trial process." 29  Indeed, courts have "'wide latitude' to limit reasonably a criminal defendant's right to cross-examine a witness 'based on concerns about, among other things, harassment, prejudice, confusion of the issues, the witness' safety, or interrogation that is repetitive or only marginally relevant.'" 30  
This Court's decision in People v Hackett requires a court to determine the constitutionality of exclusion of evidence under the rape shield statute on a case-by-case basis, 31  as long as "[t]he defendant . . . make[s] an offer of proof as to the proposed evidence and . . . demonstrate[s] its relevance to the purpose for which it is sought to be admitted." 32  Only then does a trial court possess the relevant information to decide whether a defendant is constitutionally entitled to present particular evidence excluded under the rape shield statute.
Here, defendant has only offered proof that the prior allegations were relevant to D.W.'s credibility. The Constitution does not require evidence of sexual conduct, such as these prior allegations, to be introduced when the defendant's only proffered reason for introducing such evidence is to wage a general attack on a witness's credibility, as opposed to a specific attack on a witness's "possible biases, prejudices, or ulterior motives . . . ." 33  The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals decision in Boggs v Collins is instructive on this point:
No matter how central an accuser's credibility is to a case--indeed, her credibility will almost always be the cornerstone of a rape or sexual assault case, even if there is physical evidence--the Constitution does not require that a  defendant be given the opportunity to wage a general attack on credibility by pointing to individual instances of past conduct. 34 
Our Legislature has determined that the fact that a complainant had been abused in the past is simply irrelevant to her present credibility. This would seem to be an especially important policy when such prior sexual abuse occurred when D.W. could have been as young as three years old and when D.W. made her prior allegations of abuse when she was five years old.
Defendant's latest and third argument for introducing the evidence--explaining D.W.'s age-inappropriate sexual knowledge and behavior--is somewhat more compelling. 35  By failing to introduce this theory of admissibility at trial, however, defendant has forfeited it and bears the burden to show: "1) error must have occurred, 2) the error was plain, i.e., clear or obvious, and 3) the plain error affected substantial rights." 36  And, if defendant can meet his burden, this Court must exercise its discretion to reverse only when "the defendant is actually innocent or the error seriously affected the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings." 37  
Defendant has failed to show that error occurred, much less that it was clear or obvious. As noted earlier, the constitutional right to present a defense must be balanced against the state's interest in protecting the integrity of criminal sexual conduct trials and the privacy of complainants. Hackett expressed that constitutional concerns might trump the rape shield statute when showing (on a proper offer of proof) that the complainant's prior victimization is probative of her bias or ulterior motive against the criminal defendant. 38  Defendant does not make such a claim here.
The Court of Appeals decision in People v Morse held that, before a jury may hear evidence of prior sexual abuse against a complainant, the trial judge must determine (at an in camera hearing): (1) that the proffered evidence is relevant, (2) that  another person was convicted of criminal sexual conduct (CSC) involving the complainant, and (3) that the facts underlying the previous conviction are significantly similar to the case before it. 39  
Because D.W.'s step-grandfather was not charged with CSC, let alone convicted of such a crime, evidence of previous abuse is not eligible for introduction at trial under Morse. Morse appropriately balanced the defendant's necessity for introducing a defense with the state's interests in protecting the integrity of CSC trials and the privacy of complainants. It is much less invasive to a complainant if the previous abuse suffered is already a matter of public record that had previously been examined in open court. Accordingly, there is no compelling justification for extending this test to previous acts of CSC committed against a complainant that have not already withstood the publicity of a trial. 40  
Defendant is, therefore, not constitutionally entitled to introduce evidence of the previous abuse D.W. suffered. Accordingly, he is not entitled to a new trial.
III. Conclusion
For the reasons stated, I concur in this Court's decision to deny leave to appeal. D.W.'s prior sexual victimization is covered under the plain meaning of the rape shield statute, and the exclusion of that evidence pursuant to the statute did not violate defendant's constitutional rights. Accordingly, he is not entitled to a new trial.
CORRIGAN, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.
