  
Concur




Young, C.J. (concurring).
I concur fully in the denial of defendant's motion for rehearing, but write briefly to respond to defendant's claim that the proffered evidence was "exculpatory," leading to the conclusion that "there has been a wrongful conviction in this case."
As indicated in the trial court's opinion and order denying defendant's motion for a new trial, the "newly discovered evidence" at issue was exhibits J,1  K,2  and L.3  While the actual x-ray films were submitted as an exhibit,4  it is patently obvious that the proper interpretation of radiological films, and the clinical significance of that interpretation, lay well beyond the understanding and competence of an untrained layman, thus necessitating the use of expert medical opinion5  to support defendant's claim of exculpatory evidence.
  However, the Court of Appeals specifically disavowed that exhibit L, the supplemental report of Dr. Rothfeder, provided the basis for reversing the trial court's order denying defendant's motion for a new trial. The Court of Appeals stated that "the newly discovered evidence consists of the condition of [RS's] ribs as revealed in the 2009 skeletal survey, not Rothfeder's report."6 
This leaves exhibit J, the radiology report of Dr. Gibson, as the sole basis for the Court of Appeals' conclusion that the 2009 skeletal survey "shatter[ed] the scientific cornerstone of the prosecution's evidence that the rib abnormalities were consistent only with fractures, and not an underlying bone abnormality."7  However, this conclusion is not remotely consistent with Dr. Gibson's report. The report states that on May 6, 2009 (18 months after the child was removed from the home and 10 months after defendant's trial concluded), the victim had some irregularities and abnormalities on several of her ribs "which may be due to old fractures." The report provides no basis to conclude that the "irregularities" and "abnormalities" were indicative of metabolic bone disease. Moreover, when Dr. Rothfeder's supplemental report indicated that the 2009 skeletal survey suggested metabolic bone disease, Dr. Gibson's follow-up correspondence was blunt and clear, removing any lingering doubt regarding his medical opinion: "The changes in the ribs described in my report could be accounted for on the basis of past trauma. I did not, in my opinion, see any evidence on the films to suggest metabolic bone disease."
Thus, contrary to the assertions of defendant and the conclusion of the Court of Appeals, the evidence relied on by defendant was not exculpatory. I fully concur in the denial of defendant's motion for rehearing.
Marilyn Kelly and Hathaway, JJ., would grant rehearing.

 

