
I write to provide a suggestion to sentencing courts that will hopefully curtail the cycle of appellate sentencing litigation that this Court's prior decisions have created. This Court has, through a series of recent decisions, 7  construed the statutory sentencing guidelines in such a fashion that even modal defects necessitate resentencing. 8  I do not believe that the sentencing guidelines warrant such a construction or result.
 In People v Babcock, this Court held that
if the trial court articulates multiple reasons, and the Court of Appeals . . . determines that some of these reasons are substantial and compelling and some are not, and the Court of Appeals is unable to determine whether the trial court would have departed to the same degree on the basis of the substantial and compelling reasons, the Court must remand the case to the trial court for resentencing or rearticulation. 9 
I joined Justice Corrigan in her partial dissent in Babcock because I shared her belief that the remand requirement stated therein was inconsistent with the language of MCL 769.34(11). 10  Although I am obligated to follow the law as established by this Court, I respectfully continue to believe that most remands mandated by this Court's holding in Babcock are unnecessary and not mandated by the statutory guidelines.
In a similar vein, this Court, in People v Francisco, mandated a remand for resentencing anytime an appellate court finds "'an error in scoring the sentencing guidelines,'" 11  regardless whether the original sentence still falls within the appropriate sentencing guidelines range upon rescoring. 12  Again, I joined Justice Corrigan dissenting from the majority's decision because I believed that the holding was contrary to the language of MCL 769.34(10). I continue to believe that scoring errors should be reviewed under our harmless error rule, MCR 2.613(A), and that most remands mandated by this Court's holding in Francisco are not required by the statute. 
The cumulative effect of the remands mandated by Babcock and Francisco has left this Court in a perpetual state of error correction. Fortunately, the trial courts of this state are not hopelessly subject to  endless review by this Court when imposing a criminal sentence. In Babcock, this Court made the remand requirement contingent on the appellate court's ability to "determine the trial court's intentions." 13  This Court even suggested that if a trial court suspects that one of its reasons for departure may not be "substantial and compelling" to the appellate courts, the judge may avoid the requisite remand by stating: "I would impose the same sentence regardless of this reason." 14  In addition, in  People v Mutchie, 15  this Court held that the remand that is required by Francisco is not required when the trial court "clearly expressed its view that the sentences imposed in [that] case were the proper sentences without regard to [a potential scoring error]." 16  Thus, it is imperative that sentencing judges do a more precise job in articulating their sentencing decisions when they believe that they have imposed a fair sentence. 
In the present case, defendant's original recommended sentencing guidelines range was 126 to 210 months. The trial court departed upward from the original guidelines and sentenced defendant to a minimum sentence of 240 months in prison. The parties do not dispute that the trial court gave substantial and compelling reasons for the departure. 17  The prosecutor concedes, however, that prior record variable 5 18  was incorrectly scored and that the recommended guideline range should have been 108 to 180 months. However, the trial court did not expressly state that it would impose the same sentence regardless of any scoring errors that may change the guidelines range; thus, defendant is entitled to resentencing under Francisco. 
In an effort to provide some relief to sentencing courts that wish to avoid resentencing orders that this Court's previous decisions would otherwise require, I am providing two sentencing instructions that I recommend all trial court judges cut out and paste into their bench books and use when they appropriately reflect the judge's sentencing intent. First, to avoid unnecessary remands for cases involving a sentencing departure, I suggest that all judges read the following passage into the record when appropriate:
Having acknowledged the substantial and compelling reasons justifying an upward/downward departure from the recommended sentencing guidelines, I believe a     year/month sentence is sufficiently warranted by each of the substantial and compelling reasons I have outlined. Moreover, I believe that the      year/month sentence I am imposing today is proportionate to the seriousness of the defendant's conduct and record and produces a proportionate criminal sentence, regardless of any potential errors in scoring the sentencing  guidelines that may affect the recommended sentencing guidelines range.
Second, to avoid unnecessary remands for cases in which a sentencing departure is not necessary, I suggest the following:
I believe that the     year/month sentence I am imposing today is proportionate to the seriousness of the defendant's conduct and record and produces a proportionate criminal sentence, regardless of any potential errors in scoring the sentencing guidelines that may affect the recommended sentencing guidelines range.
While I do not encourage the trial judges of this state to "game" the statutory sentencing guidelines, I do encourage judges to include these statements when a sentencing judge is convinced that the length of the sentence imposed is appropriate, even if there may be some undetected minor defect in the calculation of the recommended sentencing guidelines range. 19  
CORRIGAN, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.

 

