, Jr.    
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
I disagree that evidence failing admissibility under one of the enumerated exceptions can nevertheless be admitted under the catch-all exception, MRE 803(24). Because the majority concludes otherwise, I respectfully dissent. I fully acknowledge that I advocate a minority position; however, I believe that this position best comports with the text of the residual hearsay exception as well as our time-honored prohibition against the admission of hearsay evidence.
The rule against the admissibility of hearsay is a venerable doctrine deeply rooted in our common law. The principle has been called "a rule which may be esteemed, next to jury trial, the greatest contribution of that eminently practical legal system to the world's methods of procedure." 1 
  Traditionally, witnesses were required to be present at trial, be placed under oath, and be subject to cross-examination in order to testify. Under those circumstances, a witness's credibility, memory, perception, and narration could be evaluated by the trier of fact. 2 McCormick, Evidence (5th ed), Hearsay Rule, § 245, p 93. The rule against hearsay is designed to maintain the integrity of witness testimony. 2 
Over the years, a number of exceptions to the general rule prohibiting the admission of hearsay have been developed. Generally, the exceptions rest on the conclusion that the circumstances of the making of particular statement provide circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness. These guarantees are found because the circumstances surrounding the making of the statement minimize or negate the hearsay dangers, such as insincerity or failure of memory.
In this case, the hearsay testimony at issue is specifically covered by MRE 803, but cannot be admitted under that exception because, as the state concedes, the evidence was not the first corroborative statement regarding the incident. Accordingly, under the plain language of MRE 803(24), the evidence is "specifically covered" by MRE 803A and cannot be admitted under MRE 803(24). 3 
  The approach advanced by the majority subverts our historical prohibition against the admission of hearsay evidence. In the majority view, evidence that is clearly inadmissible under one of the enumerated hearsay exceptions gets a second chance at admissibility under the residual exception if, among other factors, "the interests of justice", MRE 803(24)(C), would be served by its admission. The criterion, particularly when coupled with the deferential abuse of discretion standard for appellate review, 4  essentially renders the general prohibition against hearsay, and the development of what hearsay is excepted  and not excepted, hollow and meaningless. 5 
  Against the nearly four hundred-year-old historical development of our hearsay rules, it is clear that the drafters of the rules did not intend a wholesale trampling of the enumerated hearsay exceptions when the federal residual hearsay exceptions were enacted. 6  The advisory committee noted that the residual exceptions "do not contemplate an unfettered exercise of judicial discretion, but they do provide for treating new and presently unanticipated situations which demonstrate a trustworthiness within the spirit of the specifically stated exceptions." 7 
In this case, DD's statement to Angela Bowman was not a "new and presently unanticipated situation." In fact, evidence of second and subsequent corroborative statements are specifically contemplated and explicitly rejected by the clear language of MRE 803(A)--"if the declarant made more than one corroborative statement about the incident, only the first is admissible under this rule." (Emphasis added.)
When construing a court rule, which includes a rule of evidence, this Court applies the legal principles that govern the construction of statutes. McAuley v Gen Motors Corp, 457 Mich. 513, 518; 578 N.W.2d 282 (1998). Accordingly, we begin with the plain language of the rule. When the language of the rule is unambiguous, we enforce the meaning expressed, without further judicial construction or interpretation. Tryc v Michigan Veterans' Facility, 451 Mich. 129, 135; 545 N.W.2d 642 (1996).
The majority treats the residual hearsay exception as if it read "A statement not specifically admissible under any of the foregoing exceptions" 8  rather than "specifically covered." Clearly, the plain language of the rule does not support such a reading. 
 This Court made deliberate choices in deciding what varieties of hearsay would be admissible and reflected those choices in the words of the hearsay exceptions. The line-drawing efforts reflected in the enumerated hearsay exceptions are rendered purposeless if hearsay that does not meet the textual requirements of a specific hearsay exception is alternatively admitted under the residual exception. 9 
I believe that the trial court erred in allowing the hearsay testimony to be admitted into evidence. Furthermore, I do not believe that the error was harmless. The testimony of the children at trial was at times vague and inconsistent, and the physical examination of the children was inconclusive.
While the alternative construction proffered by my colleagues in the majority is a principled one, I believe my construction best harmonizes with the actual text of the evidentiary rule as well as our general and historical prohibition against the admission of hearsay evidence. The clear language of the residual hearsay exception precludes admissibility where the evidence does not meet the specific textual requirements of an enumerated hearsay exception. 
I urge this Court to consider repealing MRE 803(24) and MRE 804(b)(5).
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Michael F. Cavanagh
Clifford W. Taylor 

 

