  
Dissent




Because defendant's unconditional guilty plea to felony non-support waived any claim that defendant was constitutionally entitled to raise an indigency defense, I dissent from the order granting leave to appeal.
Pursuant to the Cobbs 1  evaluation provided by the trial court, defendant pled guilty to felony non-support 2  in exchange for a payment arrangement that would permit defendant to avoid incarceration. Specifically, defendant agreed to pay $ 3,000 by December 8, 2008, at which point his sentencing would be adjourned for six months. If defendant paid an additional $ 5,000 toward his arrearage by the end of the six month period, he would avoid incarceration altogether. Defendant's guilty plea contained no conditions. When defendant had not paid the agreed-upon amount by the agreed-upon time, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment within the sentencing guidelines. Nine months after sentencing, defendant raised for the first time his claim of indigency in his motion to withdraw his guilty plea.
An unconditional guilty plea that is knowing and intelligent--and defendant makes no claim that his guilty plea was otherwise--waives claims of error on appeal, even claims of constitutional dimension. 3  Two recognized exceptions to this rule exist. The first recognized exception is that the court below lacked subject-matter jurisdiction over the case, "because it involves a court's power to hear a case, [which] can never be forfeited or waived." 4  The second exception is the defendant's right "not to be haled into court at all," 5  which implicates "the very authority of the state to bring a defendant to trial," not merely "the factual determination of defendant's  guilt." 6  An example of this exception is a claim that a charged offense violated the double jeopardy clause, which may be appealed despite a defendant's admitted guilt. 7  
As none of defendant's claims falls into either of these exceptions, his claims of error have been waived by his guilty plea. I would deny leave to appeal.
DAVIS, J., not participating. I recuse myself and am not participating because I was on the Court of Appeals panel in this case. See MCR 2.003(B).

 

