, Jr.  
Concur




Young, C.J. (concurring).
In 2008, this Court decided to institute a pilot project to test the efficacy of several proposed changes to court rules pertaining to jurors. The project began in late 2008 and ended December 31, 2010. On June 29, 2011, this Court issued an administrative order instituting many of the proposed jury reforms by amending MCR 2.512, 2.513, 2.514, 2.515, 2.516, and 6.414.1  The rules went into effect on September 1, 2011, and the Court said it would review the efficacy of the changes in 2014.
 While the pilot project was ongoing, defendant was charged with carjacking and felony-firearm. Defendant admitted that he stole the victim's car, but he claimed that contrary to the victim's testimony, he  never brandished a pistol. The trial judge announced to the jury during preliminary instructions that he was one of seven circuit judges who had been chosen to participate in a pilot program to test proposed changes to the way jury trials are conducted. The judge explained that contrary to past practices, the jurors would be permitted to discuss the evidence among themselves during the trial, as long as all the jurors were present in the jury room. He also explained that it was important for them to keep discussions tentative until they had heard all of the evidence, the court's instructions, and the attorneys' arguments. The jurors were also given notebooks with some of the instructions. Defense counsel objected to allowing the jurors to engage in predeliberation discussions. The jury ultimately convicted defendant as charged.
Defendant appealed as of right, claiming that the jurors' predeliberation discussions violated his due process right to trial by an impartial jury. The Court of Appeals rejected defendant's claim and affirmed his convictions in an unpublished opinion per curiam.2  The Court of Appeals held that the jurors' predeliberation discussions did not violate defendant's right to a fair trial because the trial court's order was consistent with Administrative Order 2008-2 and because none of the potential problems with allowing jurors to engage in predeliberation discussions were implicated.
We granted defendant's application for leave to appeal and directed the parties to address "whether the circuit judge's instruction to the jury permitting jurors to discuss the evidence among themselves in the jury room during trial recesses violated the defendant's right to an impartial jury and a fair trial."3 
Criminal defendants have a right to an impartial jury4  and to a fair trial,5  but there is no explicit constitutional right prohibiting jurors from discussing the case among themselves before the matter is submitted to them for decision. In this case, defendant claims a due process violation. In resolving a due process challenge, we must consider whether a particular procedure—such as the procedure forbidding jurors from undertaking predeliberation discussions—is fundamentally necessary to ensure a fair trial.6  Since "[h]istorical practice is probative of whether a procedural rule can be characterized as fundamental,"7  it is appropriate to consider the history of juries in English and American jurisprudence. The earliest English juries conducted their own investigations and asked questions at will during trial.8  Over time, juries became less and less active.9  By the eighteenth century, "the jury model available to the colonies  was one based on almost total jury passivity."10  Most, if not all, of the colonies had prohibitions on predeliberation discussions in place when the federal Constitution was ratified.11  Thus, the historical practice in the United States since the time of ratification has been to prohibit predeliberation discussions.
While consideration of an historical practice is a relevant inquiry, a practice is not constitutionally required merely because it has traditionally been used in American courts. In Williams v Florida, the Supreme Court of the United States upheld Florida's use of 6-person juries, notwithstanding the common law tradition of 12-person juries.12  In doing so, it established a framework to determine whether a particular aspect of a jury trial "has been immutably codified into our Constitution."13  The Court concluded that the Framers did not "equate the constitutional and common-law characteristics of the jury."14  Rather, a court must examine "the function that the particular feature performs and its relation to the purposes of the jury trial"15  to determine whether that feature is "an indispensible component of the Sixth Amendment."16 
To this end, the Court stated that the "essential feature of a jury obviously lies in the interposition between the accused and his accuser of the commonsense judgment of a group of laymen, and in the community participation and shared responsibility that results from that group's determination of guilt or innocence."17  Thus, in Williams, the Court concluded that "the 12-man requirement cannot be regarded as an indispensable component of the Sixth Amendment."18 
Applying the framework required by Williams leads me to conclude that allowing jurors to engage in predeliberation discussions neither violates the basic purposes of a jury nor prevents members of the community from using their common sense to decide a defendant's guilt by discussing among themselves the evidence as it is produced during a trial. In fact, there is evidence that predeliberation discussions enhance a jury's ability to reach a fairer and just result.19 
Those who oppose a rule allowing predeliberation discussions typically raise five arguments in support of their claim that predeliberation discussions are unconstitutional. All are based on intuition about human behavior and have no real support  in studies of jury behavior. First, they argue that "since the prosecution's evidence is presented first, any initial opinions formed by jurors are likely to be unfavorable to the defendant, and there is a tendency for a juror to pay greater attention to evidence that confirms his initial opinion."20  Even if this unsupported assertion were true, it would have no bearing on the issue presented because jurors can rely on earlier-presented evidence more than later-presented evidence even when predeliberation discussions are not allowed. The prosecution traditionally presents its evidence first. This is an inevitable aspect of our system as the prosecution bears the burden of proving every element beyond a reasonable doubt and the defendant does not have a duty to present any evidence. There is also some contrary evidence that during predeliberation discussions jurors may be alerted to problems with their initial impressions and pay closer attention to potential flaws or strong arguments in opposition to their initial impressions.21  Thus, the fact that the prosecution presents its evidence first does not create impartial juries or render trials unfair.
The second asserted problem with allowing predeliberation discussions is that "jurors might form premature conclusions without having heard the final arguments of both sides" or the court's final instructions on the law they are to apply to the facts of the case.22  Again, individual jurors can just as easily reach premature conclusions in cases in which predeliberation discussions are prohibited. Jurors can also reach premature conclusions that favor a defendant just as easily as they can reach premature conclusions about a defendant's guilt.23  Moreover, to reduce the effects of not having the final instructions on the law, the jurors in the instant case were given binders with some of the pertinent instructions at the beginning of the trial.
Third, opponents of predeliberation discussions argue that predeliberation discussions create partiality and render the trial unfair because "once a juror declares himself before his fellow jurors he is likely to stand by his opinion even if contradicted by subsequent evidence."24  Again, this position is not based on anything more than a supposition about human behavior. Even if this were a valid assumption, the trial judge here gave repeated, emphatic, and clear instructions to the jurors to keep an open mind during predeliberation discussions. I believe that we should presume that the jurors followed those instructions just as we presume that they follow other instructions.25  If jurors are told that predeliberation discussions are tentative, then a juror's personal embarrassment of retreating from an earlier stated opinion is significantly curbed. Interestingly, contrary to the assumption  that jurors might become fixed in an early impression of the case, studies suggest that jurors allowed to engage in predeliberation discussions change their mind just as often as those who do not engage in predeliberation discussions.26 
A fourth argument in opposition to predeliberation discussions is that "the defendant is entitled to have his case considered by the jury as a whole, not by separate groups or cliques that might be formed within the jury prior to the conclusion of the case."27  Again, when, as in this case, the trial judge gives repeated, emphatic, and clear instructions that the jury may only discuss the case when all jurors are present and participating, we should presume that the jurors followed that instruction.28  Admittedly, there is some evidence that jurors allowed to engage in predeliberation discussions have disobeyed instructions to only engage in discussions when all jurors were present.29  However, jurors who are willing to disobey the instruction to not engage in predeliberation  discussions without all the jurors present are just as likely to disobey a judge's instruction not to engage in predeliberation discussions at all. The fact that some juries may discuss the case without all members present also does not necessarily deprive defendants of the right to a fair trial or make juries impartial because it is the type of error that could benefit the defendant just as easily as it could benefit the prosecution.
The final argument against allowing predeliberation discussions is that such a practice allows alternate jurors to exert undue influence on the 12 people actually charged with reaching a verdict. As with the other criticisms, there is no claim or evidence that the practice leads to a prejudiced or biased jury or that it somehow makes the trial fundamentally unfair. Allowing alternate jurors to participate in predeliberation discussions does not benefit one side more than the other and thus does not render the jury impartial. Since this argument fails to demonstrate how allowing predeliberation discussions undercuts the basic purpose of a jury, it is unpersuasive.
Because I see no real evidence that generally allowing the jurors to engage in predeliberation discussions will render a defendant's trial unfair or render the jurors impartial, and defendant here does no more than recite the unsupported assertions that predeliberation discussions are a bad idea, I concur in this Court's order denying defendant's application for leave to appeal the Court of Appeals' decision.
Our decision to deny defendant's application for leave to appeal the Court of Appeals' decision does not ignore or overrule precedent. Justice Hathaway claims in her dissenting statement that our decision fails to adhere to "precedent" set forth in People v Hunter.30  However, this Court's discussion of predeliberation juror discussions in Hunter was clearly nonbinding obiter dictum. "Obiter dicta are not binding precedent. Instead, they are statements that are unnecessary to determine the case at hand and, thus, lack the force of an adjudication."31  In Hunter, this Court held that the circuit court's  instruction to the jury regarding self-defense was erroneous and "sufficiently prejudicial in our view to require reversal and remand . . . ."32  After so holding, this Court "deem[ed] it appropriate to comment on 1 other aspect of this case," specifically, the circuit court's instruction to the jury at the beginning of the trial allowing the jurors to discuss the evidence among themselves throughout the course of the trial.33  Because this Court had previously held that the self-defense instruction was sufficiently prejudicial to require reversal of the defendant's conviction, any "comment"34  on the instruction allowing jurors to discuss the evidence throughout trial was obiter dictum and not "nationally accepted precedent" as Justice Hathaway claims. We are not bound to adhere to statements in Hunter suggesting "juries should be directed by the court [to not engage in discussions about the evidence] until ready to deliberate upon their verdict at the conclusion of the trial."35  Accordingly, Hunter does not control the outcome of this case, and for the reasons previously set forth, allowing jurors to engage in predeliberation discussions in this case did not violate defendant's right to due process of law.
