).
I concur in this Court's order remanding this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration as on leave granted. I write separately to express my belief that the circuit court erred in dismissing the various charges brought against defendant. Contrary to the expostulations of Chief Justice Kelly and Justice Hathaway, defendant was not charged with violating the Sex Offenders Registration Act (SORA) 12  because he is homeless or lacks a permanent residence. Rather, the criminal charges lodged against defendant are premised upon the fact that he made absolutely no effort to comply with the quarterly reporting requirements of the SORA for three years.
Defendant is a convicted sex offender who has been homeless since his release from prison in 2002. When defendant initially registered under SORA, he falsely provided the address of the soup kitchen where he ate meals but did not reside. Defendant last reported this address in 2003, and has not reported or updated his address since. 13  
 Defendant was charged with one felony count and three misdemeanor counts relating to his failure to report in person to a local law enforcement agency on a quarterly basis, to update his residence information, and his failure to pay a reporting fee in violation of SORA. The district court bound defendant over for trial as charged. The circuit court dismissed the charges because it could not "see how a homeless person" "with no place to go" could "comply with the terms of the act." The prosecution appealed to the Court of Appeals, which denied leave to appeal.
I believe that the circuit court erred in dismissing the charges against defendant. MCL 28.725a(3) and (4) 14  require a convicted sex offender to report to the local law enforcement agency in the county in which he "is domiciled or resides" 15  on a quarterly basis. These provisions require the individual to provide proof of domicile or residence and update any information that must be provided by statute. MCL 28.725(1) further provides that upon changing or vacating a residence or domicile, the individual must notify the agency of the new residence or domicile within 10 days. The burden then shifts to the agency to verify the information provided. 16  
Certainly, there was nothing preventing defendant from complying with the reporting requirements of MCL 28.725a(3) and (4) and informing law enforcement of his current living arrangements. It is undisputed that defendant had not reported to any police agency since 2003. Contrary to Chief Justice Kelly and Justice Hathaway's contentions, there is nothing "absurd" about the state's requirement that persons convicted of sexual crimes periodically inform the police of their living arrangements, even if they are homeless. The registration requirements of SORA "are intended to provide law enforcement and the people of this state with an appropriate, comprehensive, and effective means to monitor those persons who pose such a potential danger." MCL 28.721a. Law enforcement's knowledge that a homeless sexual offender is residing in a city park, an abandoned building, 17  or within 1000 feet of school property 18  undoubtedly provides the police with the ability to monitor predators and protect the public.
SORA requires a sex offender to provide proof of his residence or domicile, but does not identify any exclusive method of providing such proof. While defendant's homelessness may have provided unusual problems in proving his residence, the statute expressly contemplates atypical living arrangements, permitting the State Police to specify other satisfactory means of proving proof of domicile or residence. MCL 28.725a(8) provides:
An individual required to be registered under this act shall maintain either  a valid operator's or chauffeur's license issued under the Michigan vehicle code . . . or an official state personal identification card . . . with the individual's current address. The license or card may be used as proof of domicile or residence under this section. In addition, the officer or authorized employee may require the individual to produce another document bearing his or her name and address, including, but not limited to, voter registration or a utility or other bill. The department may specify other satisfactory proof of domicile or residence. [Emphasis added.]
In the event that a sex offender reported to the local law enforcement agency and was truly unable to provide any of the statutorily enumerated documents to prove his residence or domicile, the duty would fall to the state police to devise some alternate verification method. Contrary to Justice Kelly's assertion, my interpretation of the statute does not "create[] a Catch-22 situation." A defendant is required to report in person to the local police and notify the police of his residence or domicile, wherever that may be. The burden then shifts to the law enforcement agency and the state police to decide how to verify the defendant's whereabouts for purposes of SORA. 19  I see nothing in SORA that authorizes the state to penalize a defendant merely for being homeless; rather, the statute penalizes the defendant's failure to report his residence or domicile with law enforcement. Accordingly, I concur in this Court's order remanding this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration as on leave granted.
CORRIGAN, J. and MARKMAN, J., join the statement of YOUNG, J.
