  
Concur




YOUNG, J. (concurring).
I concur in the order denying leave to appeal and write separately only to address Chief Justice KELLY's dissenting statement. Contrary to the implication Chief Justice KELLY raises, the activity underlying a juvenile adjudication is criminal in nature because it amounts to a violation of a criminal statute, even though that violation is not resolved in a "criminal proceeding." Accordingly, under the plain language of MCL 777.43, a defendant's criminal activity, including criminal activity undertaken as a juvenile, that occurred within five years of the sentencing offense is properly considered when scoring offense variable (OV) 13 (continuing pattern of criminal behavior).
While a juvenile adjudication is not a "criminal proceeding" 1  and does not result in a criminal conviction, that fact is irrelevant under the plain language of MCL 777.43. 2  OV 13 considers "criminal behavior" and "criminal activity," not criminal convictions. Every instance of "criminal behavior" or "criminal activity" within five years of the sentencing offense may be counted "regardless of whether the offense resulted in a conviction." The focus of OV 13 is on the nature of the act, not the legal disposition of the defendant's culpability.
Further, the Juvenile Code does not state that juvenile offenses are not criminal in nature. 3  MCL 712A.1(2) merely states that proceedings against juveniles "are not criminal proceedings" and does not alter the legal characterization of the underlying conduct. The family division of the circuit court has jurisdiction over a juvenile who "has violated any . . . law of  the state or of the United States," 4  including the provisions of the penal code. Accordingly, the conduct bringing the juvenile under the court's jurisdiction is certainly criminal in nature. The focus of MCL 777.43 is on the nature of the act, not whether the act resulted in a criminal conviction. Accordingly, the sentencing court does not count civil adjudications against the defendant when scoring OV 13, only the underlying criminal conduct.
I further disagree with Chief Justice KELLY's suggestion that the express mention of "juvenile adjudications" in several prior record variables 5  is evidence that such adjudications cannot be considered under OV 13. Prior record variables serve a different purpose than offense variables. Prior record variables consider the defendant's prior criminal activity that has reached a resolution in the court system. Unlike OV 13, the prior record variables do not allow for consideration of conduct that does not result in a charge and ultimate resolution by conviction or juvenile adjudication. 6  Accordingly, the specific mention of juvenile adjudications in relation to certain prior record variables is irrelevant to whether the plain language of MCL 777.43 allows the scoring of the specific conduct at issue here.
CORRIGAN, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.
