  
Dissent




 YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
Although I largely agree with the reasoning of the majority opinion, I respectfully dissent from the result. I would hold that defendant is entitled to summary disposition, affirming on alternative grounds the judgment of the Court of Appeals. I disagree with the majority that the alleged notice sent to defendant by The Nebraska Medical Center was given to an insurer by or in behalf of "a person claiming to be entitled to" personal protection insurance benefits under the no-fault act for accidental bodily injury, as required by MCL 500.3145(1). Neither the medical bill nor the medical records sent to defendant indicated that the documents were sent in behalf of a person claiming at that time to be entitled to no-fault benefits, as opposed to other benefits payable under the insurance contract.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Plaintiff, a Michigan resident, was in an automobile accident on February 28, 2009, while operating a semitruck in Nebraska. He was taken by ambulance to The Nebraska Medical Center (NMC), where he received emergency medical treatment. At the time of the accident, the company for which plaintiff worked had an insurance policy with defendant. On April 30, 2009, NMC sent defendant a bill for the medical services it provided to plaintiff, along with plaintiff's medical records. Defendant denied payment for these services, stating that there was "[n]o injury report on file for this person."
Plaintiff filed suit on August 11, 2009, seeking unpaid personal protection insurance (PIP) benefits. Plaintiff named only his personal insurer in the original complaint. Plaintiff did not amend his complaint to add defendant until March 25, 2010. After being adjudicated  the highest-priority insurer, defendant moved for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(7). Defendant argued that plaintiff's claims were barred by the one-year statute of limitations in MCL 500.3145(1), because defendant was not added to the case until more than one year after the accident. Plaintiff claimed the period of limitations had been extended because "written notice of injury" was "given to the insurer within 1 year after the accident."1  The Wayne Circuit Court granted defendant's motion for summary disposition, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.2 
II. ANALYSIS
I would affirm the grant of summary disposition to defendant, but, like the majority, I disagree with the reasoning of the Court of Appeals. The critical holding of the Court of Appeals was that "the medical bill and medical records, although sufficient in content, did not fulfill the purposes  of the statute."3  As the majority opinion explains, the Court of Appeals erroneously elevated its perception of the statute's "purpose" over the plain statutory text.4  To the extent that this holding was based on previous Court of Appeals cases that deviated from the text of MCL 500.3145(1) and created something akin to an "actual notice" or a "substantial  compliance" requirement, I would take this opportunity to clearly disavow that precedent.5 
Instead, as the majority holds, what is required is actual compliance with the statute.6  MCL 500.3145(1) reads as follows:
An action for recovery of personal protection insurance benefits payable under this chapter for accidental bodily injury may not be commenced later than 1 year after the date of the accident causing the injury unless written notice of injury as provided herein has been given to the insurer within 1 year after the accident or unless the insurer has previously made a payment of personal protection insurance benefits for the injury. If the notice has been given or a payment has been made, the action may be commenced at any time within 1 year after the most recent allowable expense, work loss or survivor's loss has been incurred. However, the claimant may not recover benefits for any portion of the loss incurred more than 1 year before the date on which the action was commenced. The notice of injury required by this subsection may be given to the insurer or any of its authorized agents by a  person claiming to be entitled to benefits therefor, or by someone in his behalf. The notice shall give the name and address of the claimant and indicate in ordinary language the name of the person injured and the time, place and nature of his injury. [7 ]
To toll the statute of limitations, MCL 500.3145(1) requires that notice be given "to the insurer . . . by a person claiming to be entitled to benefits therefor, or by someone in his behalf." I agree with the majority opinion that NMC was acting "in [plaintiff's] behalf," and that the notice satisfied the relevant substantive requirements defined in the final sentence of MCL 500.3145(1). However, the majority  opinion also holds that the notice must be given by or in behalf of the party that ultimately makes a claim under the no-fault act—that is, by "a person claiming to be entitled to benefits" at the time the action is commenced. I believe instead, on the basis of the statutory context, that this clause requires that the notice be given by "a person claiming to be entitled to benefits" at the time the notice is given. As I will explain, the notice sent by NMC in this case was insufficient because it was not sent by or in behalf of a person claiming to be entitled to PIP benefits.
Under the last antecedent rule, the descriptive clause, "claiming to be entitled to benefits," modifies the noun "person."8  The present participle "claiming" does not immediately connote the exact time at which the statutory "person" must be claiming entitlement to no-fault benefits. The ordinary meaning of the verb "claim" is "to ask for [especially] as a right."9  Again,  this definition could lend itself to either interpretation: a person can assert a right to no-fault benefits at the time the action is initiated or the time the notice is given. A person could "claim" to be entitled to no-fault benefits either by filing a no-fault action or by asserting that "right" in a letter to an insurer. 10 
The statutory context more clearly shows that the most reasonable reading of this provision is that the person must be claiming "personal protection insurance benefits . . . for accidental bodily injury" at the time the notice is given. MCL 500.3145(1) elsewhere uses the term "claimant,"11  but in the disputed clause specifies that notice must be given "by a person claiming to be entitled to benefits." The fact that the Legislature chose to use this descriptive clause, rather than merely saying that notice must be given "by a claimant," suggests that the person giving notice must in fact be "claiming to be entitled to benefits" at the time that person notifies the insurer. 12 
Plaintiff argues that because the disputed sentence states that notice "may be given to the insurer . . . by a person claiming to be entitled to benefits therefor,"13  this clause cannot define a requirement for the statutory notice of injury. "May" generally denotes something that is permissive rather than mandatory, in  contrast to the word "shall," which is used in the second sentence. 14  However, in the context of the sentence and this statutory provision, "may" is more reasonably read as stating that notice may be given either "by  a person claiming to be entitled to benefits" or "by someone in his behalf," but notice must be given by someone claiming no-fault benefits. 15  The word "may" is permissive with regard to which of the two defined categories of persons may give the notice, but the sentence as a whole creates a mandatory requirement. Indeed, to read this sentence as plaintiff suggests would render it surplusage. 16  If notice could be given by the two specified categories of persons, but need not be given by either, it is unclear what purpose this language would accomplish.
NMC sent defendant a bill for the services NMC had rendered to plaintiff along with plaintiff's medical records. The parties agree on appeal that these are the only documents that could possibly constitute notice under MCL 500.3145(1). There is no indication that the bill stated that plaintiff, or NMC acting "in his behalf," was seeking payment of PIP benefits, rather than payment of other benefits under the insurance policy. 17  NMC did not otherwise contact  defendant at the time this notice was sent to apprise defendant that it was acting in behalf of a person "claiming to be entitled to benefits therefor." 18  MCL 500.3145(1) may not have required NMC to have included in the bill a statement containing the exact language, "these documents are sent in behalf of a person claiming PIP benefits under the no-fault act," but it did require that the notice be sent by or in behalf of a person actively claiming PIP benefits. That was not the case here.
Plaintiff argues that because the insurance policy covered no-fault benefits, defendant was notified that this claim for benefits under the policy could lead to a no-fault claim. However, the insurance policy that defendant issued to plaintiff's employer did not solely cover no-fault PIP benefits; conceivably, the documents sent to defendant by NMC could have been claiming other benefits due under the policy. MCL 500.3145(1) requires notice that a person is claiming no-fault benefits, not that a person could claim or might possibly be claiming no-fault benefits.
III. CONCLUSION
The medical bill was not given to defendant "by a person claiming to be entitled to benefits therefor, or by someone in his behalf." Therefore, the medical bill and records were insufficient to avoid operation of the statute of limitations in MCL 500.3145(1). On the  basis of this alternative analysis, I would affirm both the judgment of the Court of Appeals and the trial court's decision granting summary disposition to defendant.
Robert P. Young, Jr.

 

