 in part and dissenting in part).
I concur only in the result of the majority opinion, which holds that defendant, Huron Valley Radiology, P.C. (Huron), is not entitled to dismissal.
I respectfully dissent from the majority's holding that a plaintiff is required to serve a professional corporation not enumerated in MCL 333.20106(1) with a notice of intent to commence a medical malpractice action (NOI) under MCL 600.2912b ("the NOI statute"). Such a defendant is neither a "health professional" nor a "health facility" under the NOI statute; thus, a plaintiff is not required to give that defendant written notice under the NOI statute before commencing a medical malpractice action. I would additionally hold that plaintiff's claim against defendant Huron was tolled pursuant to MCL 600.5856(d) because plaintiff provided an NOI in compliance with the NOI statute for "a claim" that would have been barred during the applicable notice period.
I further dissent from the majority's analysis whether plaintiff's NOI was deficient. The NOI statute requires that the plaintiff provide a statement of "[t]he factual basis for the claim." 1  A necessary factual predicate for a vicarious liability claim is that there is an employer-employee (or other principal-agent) relationship, but such a statement of defendant Huron's relationship to the other individual defendants is not found in plaintiff's NOI; thus, plaintiff's NOI is defective.
As the majority opinion itself demonstrates, it is swiftly becoming increasingly acceptable for this Court to avoid attempting a precise or meaningful statutory analysis in favor of imprecise vagaries and broad pronouncements. Such analyses are favored only by those  who seek a particular result and cannot find an explicable justification for it. The majority's analysis threatens to render the statutory notice procedure nugatory and undermines, if not overrules, this Court's precedent. 2  I believe that this Court's decisions should be grounded in precise and rigorous analysis of the relevant statutory text and that this Court should avoid creating "inconsistencies among its cases and . . . reduce confusion in [the Court's] jurisprudence by overruling conflicting decisions." 3  
Accordingly, I would reverse the Court of Appeals and hold that defendant is not entitled to dismissal due to plaintiff's defective NOI.
I. Plaintiff Was Not Required to Serve Defendant Huron, A Professional Corporation, With An NOI.
The Court of Appeals held that plaintiff served defendant Huron, a professional corporation, with a defective NOI and that entitled Huron to dismissal. However, only a "health professional" and "health facility" are entitled to notice under the  NOI statute, MCL 600.2912b. 4  Thus, a threshold issue is whether defendant Huron is a "health professional" or "health facility." If not, the defect in plaintiff's NOI is rendered moot and does not entitle defendant to dismissal.
 Because plaintiff has persuasively argued in this Court that defendant Huron is neither a "health professional" nor a "health facility" entitled to notice under the NOI statute, I would hold that plaintiff's defective NOI as to defendant Huron was inconsequential. 5  
  This Court has previously defined the term "health facility" in the NOI statute through reference to the Public Health Code (PHC), 6  which defines "health facility or agency" as:
 (a) An ambulance operation, aircraft transport operation, nontransport prehospital life support operation, or medical first response service.
(b) A clinical laboratory.
(c) A county medical care facility.
(d) A freestanding surgical outpatient facility.
(e) A health maintenance organization.
(f) A home for the aged.
(g) A hospital.
(h) A nursing home.
(i) A hospice.
(j) A hospice residence.
(k) A facility or agency listed in subdivisions (a) to (h) located in a university, college, or other educational institution. 7 
Several of the health facilities listed could be incorporated as professional corporations. Significantly, however, defendant Huron, although a professional corporation, is not a listed health facility. Thus, defendant Huron is not a "health facility."
The PHC does not define "health professional." "Professional," however, is commonly defined as "a member of a profession, esp. one of the learned professions." 8  The PHC defines "health profession" as "a vocation, calling, occupation, or employment performed by an individual acting pursuant to a license or registration  issued under this article." 9  Thus, only an "individual" can practice a "health profession." Because the PHC defines "individual" as "a natural person," 10  only a natural person can be a "health professional," and defendant Huron is therefore not a "health professional."
Instead of applying these interpretations consistent with our precedent, the majority relies on the definition of "licensed health care professional" in the accrual statute, MCL 600.5838a: 11  "an individual licensed  or registered under article 15 of the public health code . . .  and engaged in the practice of his or her health profession in a sole proprietorship, partnership, professional corporation, or other business entity." 12  As stated, a professional corporation is not an "individual."
Interestingly, the majority simply disregards this Court's very recent interpretation of the definition of "licensed health care professional" in the accrual statute. In Kuznar, the defendant pharmacy sought the benefit of the shortened period of limitations for medical malpractice and argued that it was subject to medical malpractice liability because it was a "licensed health care professional" under the accrual statute. Just last year, we unanimously rejected that argument and explained that "[t]he flaw in defendant's position is that the Public Health Code defines 'individual' to mean 'a natural person.'" 13  The majority's argument here suffers the same flaw that we unanimously rejected. A professional corporation is not "a natural person." Furthermore, a professional corporation is not "licensed or registered under article 15 of the public health code." The majority cannot acknowledge the existence of Kuznar without overruling it or changing its rationale here. It has therefore chosen to ignore Kuznar.
The majority's analysis is superficial. The majority merely announces that it discovered the term "professional corporation" in a related statute and, therefore, a professional corporation is entitled to notice. In serious statutory construction, context matters and so does grammar.
In the accrual statute, "licensed health care professional" is defined by modifying the subject, "an individual,"  with the clause "engaged in the practice of his or her health profession in a sole proprietorship, partnership, professional corporation, or other business entity." Thus, instead of providing that a professional corporation is a "licensed health care professional," the statute provides that practice of a health profession in a professional corporation is simply one way for "an individual" to meet the requirements to be a "licensed health care professional."
The context of subsection (1) of the accrual statute also betrays the majority's position. It provides, in pertinent part, that
a claim based on the medical malpractice of a person . . . who is . . . a licensed  health care professional, . . . whether or not the licensed health care professional . . . is engaged in the practice of the health profession in a sole proprietorship, partnership, professional corporation, or other business entity, accrues at the time of the act or omission that is the basis for the claim of medical malpractice . . . . [MCL 600.5838a(1).]
Thus, the reference to a professional corporation makes clear that practice in a professional corporation does not affect when a medical malpractice claim accrues.
Moreover, the majority's interpretation is repudiated by the rule of statutory interpretation that prohibits rendering statutory terms surplusage or nugatory. 14  The majority proclaims that "[f]or all practical purposes, the PC and the health care provider are treated as the same entity when professional services are involved." 15  This pronouncement is designed to ignore reality and the actual text of the statute.
 To arrive at its conclusion that a professional corporation is included in the NOI statute, the majority conflates common-law principles with its obligation to accurately construe this statute. It therefore emphasizes the unremarkable proposition of common-law vicarious liability that a corporation can only act through its officers and agents, 16  but ignores the equally unremarkable proposition that a corporation is a distinct legal entity. 17  The flaw in this analysis is that it imports common-law theories of liability to defeat the statutory enumeration of covered entities that does not include a professional corporation. 18  The Legislature is free to include and exclude any entity from the statutory notice procedure that it desires. By importing extra-textual theories of liability into this statutory procedural requirement, the majority deprives the Legislature of that option and renders surplusage portions of the statute the Legislature enacted.
As stated, the majority holds that a professional corporation is a "health professional" because the term "professional corporation" appears in the accrual statute  definition of "licensed health care provider." That definition, however, also includes any "other business entity." By the majority's logic, any "other business entity" is a "health professional." If that were true, then the terms "health facility" in the NOI statute and "licensed health facility or agency" in the accrual statute would be needless surplusage. For example, a hospital is listed in the PHC definition used to define "health facility" and  "licensed health care facility or agency." 19  A hospital may be incorporated and, as such, is an "other business entity." Thus, under the majority's analysis, a hospital is, "for all practical purposes," a "licensed health care professional." The same is true for all other entities listed in the PHC definition of "licensed health facility or agency." 20  Because it renders the term "health facility" in the NOI statute needless surplusage, the majority's interpretation is erroneous.
Because a defendant Huron is neither a "health facility" nor a "health professional," I would hold that plaintiff was not required to serve it with an NOI before commencing a medical malpractice action against it. 21  Thus, plaintiff's claim against defendant Huron was not subject to dismissal for a defective NOI.
  II. The Statute of Limitations For Plaintiff's Claim Against Defendant Huron Was Tolled Under MCL 600.5856(d).
This Court ordered supplemental briefing on "whether, if a defendant professional corporation is not an entity to whom notice is required to be provided under MCL 600.2912b, the applicable statute of limitations, MCL 600.5805(6), was nonetheless subject to statutory tolling provided in former MCL 600.5856(d)." 22  If the statute of limitations was not tolled under former subsection (d) of the tolling statute, MCL 600.5856, then plaintiff's claim against defendant Huron was filed after the period of limitations expired and defendant Huron would be entitled to dismissal with prejudice. I am persuaded that the statute of limitations for plaintiff's claim against Huron was tolled under former subsection (d).
The tolling statute applicable here provided: 23 
The statutes of limitations or repose are tolled:
(a) At the time the complaint is filed and a copy of the summons and complaint are served on the defendant.
(b) At the time jurisdiction over the defendant is otherwise acquired.
(c) At the time the complaint is filed and a copy of the summons and complaint in good faith are placed in the hands of an officer for immediate service, but in this case the statute is not tolled longer than 90 days after the copy of the summons and complaint is received by the officer.
(d) If, during the applicable notice period under section 2912b, a claim would be barred by the statute of limitations or repose, for not longer than a number of days equal  to the number of days in the applicable notice period after the date notice is given in compliance with section 2912b. [Emphasis added.]
Plaintiff argues that because subsection (d) uses the indefinite article "a", not the  definite article "the", it is not claim specific and, therefore, tolls all claims in the complaint. Defendant argues that tolling only applies for "a claim" to which "the applicable notice period under section 2912b" applies.
I believe that the dispositive question is "what is being tolled?" The first sentence of the tolling statute states that "[t]he statutes of limitations or repose are tolled." The plural form suggests that more than one statute of limitations can be tolled by each subsection, including subsection (d).
By their nature, each of the other tolling provisions, § 5856(a) through (c), apply to all claims in a complaint, not just individual claims. Thus, the plural form in the prefatory clause is consistent with those provisions because they could involve multiple statutes of limitations.
Based on the prefatory provision, there is a strong textual argument that under subsection (d), "[t]he statutes of limitations . . . are tolled" for all claims in a complaint when "during the applicable notice period under section 2912b, a claim would be barred by the statute of limitations or repose." Thus, for example, in a complaint alleging a malpractice claim and a negligence claim, if the requirements of subsection (d) are met, the "statutes of limitations . . . are tolled" for both claims. I believe that this is the superior textual argument.
Although the prefatory clause does not specify which statutes of limitations are tolled, there is no textual  basis for restricting tolling to a single claim. 24  Subsection (d) only requires "a claim" to be barred during the notice period and notice to be given in compliance with the NOI statute; the prefatory clause provides that multiple statutes are tolled as a result. 25  
  I note that the current tolling provision is more precise on this issue. MCL 600.5856(c) provides:
The statutes of limitations or repose are tolled in any of the following circumstances:
* * *
(c) At the time notice is given in compliance with the applicable notice period under section 2912b, if during that period a claim would be barred by the statute of limitations or repose; but in this case, the statute is tolled not longer than the number of days equal to the number of days remaining in the applicable notice period after the date notice is given. [Emphasis added.]
As indicated by the highlighted text, the significant distinction between current subsection (c) and former subsection (d) is that the current provision restates what is tolled ("the statute"), which specifies that tolling is limited to only one statute while the former provision remained unlimited by the prefatory clause ("The statutes"). Thus, current subsection (c) is expressly claim specific and only tolls "the statute" for the previously referenced claim that would be barred. 26  
 Here, plaintiff's NOI was sufficient as to co-defendant Murry. 27  Subsection (d) applied to plaintiff's claim against Murry because the period of limitations would have expired during the notice period if the statute of limitations was not tolled. Thus, "notice [was] given in compliance with section 2912b" for "a claim" that "would [have been] barred by the statute of limitations," so "[t]he statutes of limitations . . . [were] tolled." Accordingly, I would reverse the Court of Appeals and hold that defendant Huron was not entitled to dismissal.
III. Plaintiff's NOI Was Deficient.
I join part III(E) of Justice Markman's dissent 28  regarding the majority's decision to address and resolve an issue that the parties were specifically directed not to address. The majority has deprived the parties of an opportunity to brief and argue the merits of the sufficiency of plaintiff's NOI. As such, the majority's action suggests that parties should follow our grant orders at their peril. No serious court should function in this fashion.
Although not properly before this Court nor pertinent to my analysis, I address the majority's analysis that plaintiff's NOI was  not deficient because it will likely affect how lower courts evaluate an NOI. I believe that plaintiff's NOI was deficient and the majority's analysis is no more than a shallow gloss over the statutory text.
 As stated, a plaintiff must serve an NOI before commencing a medical malpractice action against a health facility or health professional. 29  In subsection (4) of the NOI statute, the Legislature has enumerated six specific topics that the plaintiff must address in his NOI:
The notice given to a health professional or health facility under this section shall contain a statement of at least all of the following:
(a) The factual basis for the claim.
(b) The applicable standard of practice or care alleged by the claimant.
(c) The manner in which it is claimed that the applicable standard of practice or care was breached by the health professional or health facility.
(d) The alleged action that should have been taken to achieve compliance with the alleged standard of practice or care.
(e) The manner in which it is alleged the breach of the standard of practice or care was the proximate cause of the injury claimed in the notice.
(f) The names of all health professionals and health facilities the claimant is notifying under this section in relation to the claim.
"Subsections 2912b(1) and (4) clearly place the burden of complying with the notice of intent requirements on the plaintiff." 30  
In Roberts II, this Court established the standard for whether an NOI complied with the statutory requirements of subsection (4) of the NOI statute: "the claimant is required to make good-faith averments that provide details that are responsive to the information  sought by the statute and that are as particularized as is consistent with the early stages of the proceedings." 31  An NOI that does not meet this standard is deficient.
Subsection (a) requires the plaintiff to provide a statement of "[t]he factual basis for the claim." Here, plaintiff has alleged that defendant Huron is vicariously liable for the acts of its agent, defendants Murry, Dr. Richard D. McLeary, and Dr. Gary Augustyn. Thus, "the claim" is vicarious liability. An essential factual predicate for plaintiff's vicarious liability claim is that the individual defendants were defendant Huron's employees. Nowhere in the notice does plaintiff suggest that any employer-employee (or other principal-agent relationship) existed between the defendants. 32  Because plaintiff omitted "[t]he factual basis for the claim," he failed to meet the Roberts II standard and, therefore, the NOI is deficient.
The majority holds that there is "no language in [subsection (4) of the NOI statute] that requires a claimant to set forth the nature of the relationship between the parties to be sued." 33  To support  its conclusion, the majority states that no such requirement is found in subsection (f). 34  That is true, but no more sufficient than stating that no such requirement is found in subsection (e). The majority offers no discussion of subsection (a)--"The factual basis for the claim"--and why a principal-agent relationship is not part of  the factual basis of plaintiff's vicarious liability claim. The majority proclaims that it is not "necessary to plead facts supporting vicarious liability." 35  As stated, here, "the claim" is vicarious liability. Thus, the majority has proudly announced that it is not necessary to state the factual basis for the claim. 36  This is most likely a relief to plaintiffs and a shock to the Legislature and anyone who has read the NOI statute since it was enacted. The majority cannot square its analysis with the text of the relevant statute, so it does not attempt such folly.
The majority buttresses its conclusion with its assessment of defendant Huron's subjective knowledge: "Certainly they are fully aware of the legal relationship between them." 37  The majority's reliance on the knowledge of this defendant is not a relevant assessment of what the Legislature has required a plaintiff to provide in its NOI.
 This Court previously rejected such a construction of subsection (4) of the NOI statute for an obvious reason: it would render the statutory notice procedure completely nugatory. 38  The NOI statute, in plain and unambiguous terms, places the burden on the plaintiff to provide "written notice under this section" 39  that "contain[s] a statement" 40  of six specific topics. Thus, the Legislature has not required that the defendant "fill in the blanks." Undeterred, the majority replaces the legislative standards with its own requirement and creates a slippery slope in which the plaintiff complies with the NOI statute by simply declaring "I went to the doctor and something bad happened." 41  Under  the majority's analysis, the burden is on the defendant to fill in the remainder of the missing but required NOI information.
The majority fails to comprehend the significance of its decision. Our decisions do not resolve only the case before us, but rather, all cases subsequently filed in Michigan raising similar issues; we are obligated to ensure that all cases are resolved in a manner that is consistent with the text of the applicable statute. 42  Consider, for example, a corporate defendant that never employed or worked with any of the other individual  defendants listed--one that is named in the NOI through mistake or error. How does an NOI that fails to allege any relationship between the corporate defendant and the individual defendants inform that defendant of the factual basis for the claim against it? The majority's analysis threatens to deprive a named defendant of the notice that the statutory procedure is designed to provide.
The justification that a particular defendant might have knowledge about data the plaintiff is statutorily obligated to supply is just a fancy way for the majority to subvert a statute it does not like. At the very least, the majority is not pretending any longer to enforce the plain language of the NOI statute.
The majority's lack of concern for the implications of its discussion is illustrated by its treatment of Roberts II. The majority purports to leave for another day the question whether Roberts II was correctly decided. 43   Nevertheless, it states that  "the issue is whether [Huron] could reasonably be held to comprehend the nature of the claims being asserted against it." 44  That standard is distinctly not the Roberts II standard set out above. Indeed, that standard is similar to the standard articulated by the dissent in Roberts II: "The statement simply must provide notice of a potential claim sufficient to allow potential defendants to ascertain the basis for the claim and enter into settlement discussions." 45  Once again, such a view is inconsistent with the statutory text.
This continues a disturbing trend in which the majority
overrules by indirection, or at least leaves the impression that it is doing so, thereby sowing the seeds of confusion and making it difficult for the citizens of this state to comprehend precisely what our caselaw requires. This appears to be an unfortunate return to our predecessors' past practice of "frequently pa[ying] little attention to the  inconsistencies among its cases and declin[ing] to reduce confusion in [the Court's] jurisprudence by overruling conflicting decisions." 46 
IV. Conclusion
I do not believe that defendant Huron is a "health professional" or "health facility" entitled to notice under the NOI statute and, therefore, plaintiff was not required to serve defendant Huron with an NOI. I also believe that plaintiff's claim against defendant Huron was tolled pursuant to subsection (d) of the tolling statute. Accordingly, I would reverse the Court of Appeals and hold that defendant Huron is not entitled to dismissal because of plaintiff's defective NOI.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
MARKMAN, J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I agree with the majority that plaintiff's notice of intent was sufficient with regard to defendant Kristyn Murry and that defendant Huron Valley Radiology, P.C. (HVR) was entitled to a notice of intent. However, I disagree that the notice of intent was sufficient with regard to HVR. The notice of intent did not contain a statement of "[t]he applicable standard of practice or care alleged by the claimant" with regard to HVR, as is required by MCL 600.2912b(4)(b). As this Court explained in Roberts v Mecosta Co Gen Hosp (After Remand), 470 Mich. 679, 693-694; 684 N.W.2d 711 (2004) (Roberts II), a notice of intent must include a "particularized standard for each of the professionals and facilities named in the notices," which necessarily must indicate "whether plaintiff [is] alleging that [the] defendants were vicariously or directly liable to [the plaintiff]."  Because the notice of intent here did not include such a statement, it was clearly defective with regard to HVR.
We held in Roberts v Mecosta Co Gen Hosp, 466 Mich 57; 642 NW2d 663 (2002) (Roberts I), that a defective notice of intent does not toll the statute of limitations. Because the period of limitations in a medical malpractice action is two years, MCL 600.5805(6), and because the alleged malpractice in this case occurred on June 7, 2001 and the complaint was not filed until November 4, 2003, the complaint was untimely filed, and thus the action against HVR is barred by the statute of limitations.  I would affirm the portions of the Court of Appeals opinion that held that the notice of intent was sufficient as to defendant Murry and insufficient as to defendant HVR, but reverse the portions of that opinion that held that the defective notice of intent tolled the statute of limitations and, thus, that a dismissal without prejudice was appropriate. The action against HVR should be dismissed with prejudice.
I. FACTS AND HISTORY
The alleged medical malpractice occurred on June 7, 2001. Plaintiff alleges that Murry, a radiologist working for HVR, "failed to properly interpret and report back the true and correct results of the MRI . . . ." He further alleges "[t]hat as a result of the . . . delay in surgical [intervention, he] has suffered permanent neurologic injury and deficit." On May 30, 2003, just eight days before the expiration of the two-year period of limitations, plaintiff served defendants Murry and HVR with a notice of intent to file suit. On November 4, 2003, plaintiff filed his medical malpractice complaint against defendants.
 The trial court denied defendants' motion for summary disposition. The Court of Appeals reversed, concluding that because plaintiff's affidavits of merit were defective, the complaint had to be dismissed with prejudice. Potter v McLeary, 274 Mich App 222; 732 NW2d 600 (2007). This Court reversed "the portion of the judgment of the Court of Appeals dismissing the complaint with prejudice, because the dismissal should have been without prejudice as to the affidavit of merit issue." Potter v McLeary, 480 Mich 915; 739 N.W.2d 866 (2007) (emphasis in the original). We remanded to the Court of Appeals for consideration of defendants' remaining issues. On remand, the Court of Appeals held that plaintiff's notice of intent was sufficient as to defendant Murry, but insufficient as to defendant HVR. However, the Court of Appeals held that the defective notice of intent tolled the statute of limitations, and thus dismissed without prejudice as to HVR. Potter v McLeary, 278 Mich. App. 279; 748 N.W.2d 599 (2008).
In Docket No. 136336, plaintiff appealed the portion of the Court of Appeals decision that held that the notice of intent was defective as to HVR, and in Docket Nos. 136338 and 136339, defendants appealed the portion of the Court of Appeals decision that held that the defective notice of intent tolled the statute of limitations, and, thus, that a dismissal without prejudice was appropriate, and the portion that held that the notice of intent was sufficient as to defendant Murry. In Docket No. 136336, we granted plaintiff's application "limited to the issue whether defendant Huron Valley Radiology, P.C., is a 'health facility or agency' to which a plaintiff is required to provide notice under MCL 600.2912b(1)." 482 Mich. 1004, 756 N.W.2d 87 (2008). In Docket Nos. 136338 and 136339, we held defendants' application for leave to appeal in abeyance pending the decision in Docket No.  136336. 756 N.W.2d 85 (2008). 1  Subsequently, in  Docket No. 136336, we directed the parties to file supplemental briefs addressing "whether, if a defendant professional corporation is not an entity to whom notice is required to be provided under MCL 600.2912b, the applicable statute of limitations, MCL 600.5805(6), was nonetheless subject to statutory tolling provided in former MCL 600.5856(d)." 483 Mich. 922, 762 N.W.2d 923 (2009).
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
"Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of law that this Court reviews de novo." People v  Swafford, 483 Mich 1, 7; 762 NW2d 902 (2009). A trial court's determination regarding a motion for summary disposition is also reviewed de novo. Odom v Wayne Co, 482 Mich 459, 466; 760 NW2d 217 (2008).
III. ANALYSIS 
A. Notice of Intent
I agree with the majority that HVR was entitled to a notice of intent. The majority concludes that HVR was entitled to a notice of intent because "the action is one sounding in medical malpractice." Ante at 3. Although I agree that the action here is "one sounding in medical malpractice," this is only the first step in the analysis to determine whether a notice of intent was required.
MCL 600.2912b(1) provides:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not commence an action alleging medical malpractice against a health professional or health facility unless the person has given the health professional or health facility written notice under this section not less than 182 days before the action is commenced.
Because § 2912b(1) only applies to an "action alleging medical malpractice," the majority is correct that "the first step in the analysis" is to determine whether the action is one "alleging medical malpractice." Ante at 14. It is undisputed that the action at issue here is such an action, because it "allege[s] an action that (1) occurred within the course of a professional relationship and (2) poses questions of medical judgment outside the realm of common knowledge and experience." Kuznar v Raksha Corp, 481 Mich 169, 176-177; 750 NW2d 121 (2008), citing  Bryant v Oakpointe Villa Nursing Ctr, Inc, 471 Mich 411, 422; 684 NW2d 864 (2004). 2  
 However, despite the majority's initial recognition that whether this action is one "alleging medical malpractice" is only the "first step in the analysis" in determining whether a notice of intent was required, ante at 14, the majority does not address the second step. Rather, it concludes that "[b]ecause § 2912b(1) clearly requires a claimant to provide a timely NOI before commencing a medical malpractice action, plaintiff was required to provide this PC with a timely NOI." Ante at 20. However, § 2912b(1) requires a notice of intent only if: (a) the action is one "alleging medical malpractice"; and (b) the defendant is a "health professional or health facility." Despite this clear language, the majority does not address whether HVR is a "health professional or health facility." 3  
Nevertheless, I believe that HVR is a "health professional" for the purposes of § 2912b. I reach this conclusion on the basis that plaintiff is seeking to hold HVR vicariously liable for its employee's alleged malpractice and such employee is unquestionably a "health professional." In Cox v Flint Bd of Hosp Managers, 467 Mich 1, 11; 651 NW2d 356 (2002), this Court explained that  under the principle of vicarious liability, "the principal 'is only liable because the law creates a practical identity with his [agents] . . . .'" (Citation omitted.) Subsequently, in Nippa v Botsford Gen Hosp (On Remand), 257 Mich App 387, 391-392; 668 NW2d 628 (2003), on remand from this Court for reconsideration in light of Cox, the Court of Appeals explained:
For all practical purposes the hospital stands in the shoes of its agents (the doctors).
Thus, we opine that with regard to vicarious liability, medical-malpractice law applicable to a physician is also applicable to the physician's hospital. . . . All procedural requirements are applicable to the hospital in the same manner and form as [they are to] the doctor . . . . This is so because the law creates a practical identity between a principal and an agent . . . .
. . . Vicarious liability imposes a legal fiction on defendant hospital providing that the principal is only liable because the law creates a practical identity with its agents . . . . The law treats the principal and the agent as sharing a single identity . . . . 4 
Because, with regard to vicarious liability, "[t]he law treats the principal and the agent as sharing a single identity," and because, in the instant case, plaintiff is seeking to hold HVR vicariously liable for its employee's alleged malpractice, and because such employee is unquestionably a "health professional" entitled to a notice of intent, the law treats HVR as also being a "health professional" entitled to a notice of intent. 5  Therefore,  plaintiff was required  to provide a notice of intent to HVR before commencing a medical malpractice action in accordance with § 2912b.
B. Sufficiency
As discussed above, § 2912b(1) provides, "a person shall not commence an action alleging medical malpractice against a health professional or health facility  unless the person has given the health professional or health facility written notice under this section not less than 182 days before the action is commenced." (Emphasis added.) MCL 600.2912b(4) provides:
The notice given to a health professional or health facility under this section shall contain a statement of at least all of the following:
(a) The factual basis for the claim.
(b) The applicable standard of practice or care alleged by the claimant.
(c) The manner in which it is claimed that the applicable standard of practice or care was breached by the health professional or health facility.
(d) The alleged action that should have been taken to achieve compliance with the alleged standard of practice or care.
(e) The manner in which it is alleged the breach of the standard of practice or care was the proximate cause of the injury claimed in the notice.
(f) The names of all health professionals and health facilities the claimant is notifying under this section in relation to the claim. [Emphasis added.]
In Roberts II, 470 Mich at 700-701, this Court explained:
 Under MCL 600.2912b(4), a medical malpractice claimant is required to provide potential defendants with notice that includes a "statement" of each of the statutorily enumerated categories of information. Although it is reasonable to expect that some of the particulars of the information supplied by the claimant will evolve as discovery and litigation proceed, the claimant is required to . . . provide details that are responsive to the information sought by the statute and that are as particularized as is consistent with the early notice stage of the proceedings. . . . This is not an onerous task: all the claimant must do is specify what it is that she is claiming under each of  the enumerated categories in § 2912b(4). Although there is no one method or format in which a claimant must set forth the required information, that information must, nevertheless, be specifically identified in an ascertainable manner within the notice. [Emphasis in the original.]
In Roberts II, the plaintiff brought a medical malpractice action against a hospital, a professional corporation, an obstetrician, a physician's assistant, and an emergency room physician. This Court held that the plaintiff must "aver the specific standard of care that she is claiming to be applicable to each particular professional or facility that is named in the notice." Id. at 692 (emphasis in the original). Because the notice of intent "fail[ed] to indicate whether plaintiff was alleging that these defendants [the hospital and professional corporation] were vicariously or directly liable to her," the plaintiff's notice of intent failed to allege "a standard specifically applicable to the defendant facilities . . . ." Id. at 693. For this reason, Roberts II held that the notice of intent was insufficient as to the defendant hospital and the defendant professional corporation.
In the instant case, the Court of Appeals similarly held that the notice of intent was insufficient as to HVR because it did not state the applicable standard of practice or care as is required by § 2912b(4)(b). 6  I agree. The notice of intent completely fails to indicate what standard of practice or care plaintiff believes is applicable  to defendant HVR, and it does not indicate whether plaintiff is alleging that defendant HVR is directly or vicariously liable to him. Indeed, as the Court of Appeals held, "The standard of care completely fails to make any reference to defendant Huron Valley Radiology." Potter, 278 Mich App at 284. In fact, the notice of intent as a whole only references HVR twice: once on the first page where it lists the health care professionals and entities to whom the notice of intent is intended to apply, and then again on the last page, where it lists the health care professionals and entities being notified of the action. Because the notice of intent does not contain a statement indicating what standard of practice or care is allegedly applicable to HVR, as is required by § 2912b(4)(b), I agree with the Court of Appeals that the notice of intent is insufficient as to defendant HVR.
 Although the majority "question[s] whether Roberts II was correctly decided," ante at 25 n 32, 7  it does not expressly overrule Roberts II because it concludes that this decision is not "dispositive." It is not dispositive,  says the majority, because "Roberts II opined that because there was confusion with regard to whether the claim was for direct or vicarious liability, the PC was unable to understand the nature of the claims being asserted," but, "[i]n the case before us, no such potential for confusion exists . . . ." Ante at 25 n 33. First, that is not what Roberts II held; rather, it held, 470 Mich at 693, 702, that because the plaintiff's notice of intent did not include a statement "indicat[ing] whether plaintiff was alleging that these defendants were vicariously or directly liable to her," "plaintiff did not fulfill her obligation under § 2912b . . . ." Second, as with Roberts II, a "potential for confusion," ante at 25 n 32, does exist here because HVR could be sued on the basis of either direct or vicarious liability, or both, and the notice of intent does not indicate on which basis plaintiff intended to sue HVR.
Furthermore, that Roberts II involved a situation in which the notice of intent may have implied that the plaintiff was seeking to hold the defendants directly liable, while the complaint implied that the plaintiff was seeking to hold the defendants vicariously liable, whereas in the instant case nothing can be implied from plaintiff's notice of intent regarding direct or vicarious liability, while the complaint seeks to hold HVR vicariously liable, is a distinction utterly without any significance in this case. The issue here is whether the notice of intent was sufficient as to HVR. Being a professional corporation, HVR could be sued on the basis of either direct liability or vicarious liability. See Cox, 467 Mich at 11, stating that "[a] hospital may be 1) directly liable for malpractice, through claims of negligence in supervision of staff physicians as well as selection and retention of medical staff, or 2) vicariously liable for the negligence of its agents." MCL 600.2912b(4)(b) requires the notice of intent to contain a statement of "[t]he applicable standard of practice or care alleged by the claimant." Obviously, the "applicable standard of practice or care" would depend on whether the claimant is suing the professional corporation on the basis of direct liability or vicarious liability. Accordingly, a notice of intent must indicate whether the claimant is suing the professional corporation on the basis of direct liability, vicarious liability, or both.
The majority holds that "when vicarious liability is the only claim asserted," it is unnecessary to "specifically set forth the legal theory of vicarious liability within the NOI." Ante at 23. However, if the notice of intent does not indicate that the plaintiff is planning on suing the defendant professional corporation on the basis of vicarious liability, how will the defendant know that "vicarious liability is the only claim asserted"?  The majority fails to recognize that the whole point of the exercise of a notice of intent is to apprise the defendant of the claims that the plaintiff plans to bring before a complaint is filed. Here, because the notice of intent was silent on the subject, HVR did not know until plaintiff filed his complaint that plaintiff was suing on the basis of vicarious liability. That is, HVR did not know what "standard of practice or care" plaintiff was alleging that HVR breached until plaintiff filed his complaint against HVR. This is most clearly a violation of § 2912b(4)(b). 8  
 The majority misunderstands the issue. Contrary to its contention, ante at 26, the issue is not whether HVR "could reasonably be held to comprehend the nature of the claims being asserted against it." Instead, as Justice Young explains, ante at 19, the issue is whether the notice of intent "provide[s] details that are responsive to the information sought by the statute . . . ." Roberts II, 470 Mich at 701 (emphasis in the original). More specifically, the issue here is whether the notice of intent contains a statement of "[t]he applicable standard of practice or care alleged by the claimant," as is required by § 2912b(4)(b). Boodt v Borgess Med Ctr, 481 Mich 558, 560-561; 751 NW2d 44 (2008) ("Although the instant notice of intent may conceivably have apprised [defendant] of the nature and gravamen of plaintiff's allegations, this is not the statutory standard; § 2912b(4)[b] requires something more."). Because the notice of intent at issue here did not contain a statement of the "applicable standard of practice or care" with regard to HVR, the notice of intent did not comply with § 2912b(4)(b). 9  
   C. Tolling
The period of limitations in medical malpractice cases is two years. MCL 600.5805(6). At the time the complaint was filed in this case, MCL 600.5856, in pertinent part, provided:
The statutes of limitations or repose are tolled:
* * *
(d) If, during the applicable notice period under section 2912b, a claim would be barred by the statute of limitations or repose, for not longer than a number of days equal to the number of days in the applicable notice period after the date notice is given in compliance with section 2912b. [Emphasis added.] 10 
 In Roberts I, 466 Mich at 59, this Court held that "the statute of limitations cannot be tolled under MCL 600.5856(d) unless notice is given in compliance with all the provisions of MCL 600.2912b." 11  As Roberts I, 466 Mich at 64, explained, "Section 5856(d) clearly provides that notice must be compliant with § 2912b . . . ." "As a result, the tolling of the statute of limitations is available to a plaintiff only if all the requirements included in § 2912b are met." Section 2912b(4) states that the notice of intent "shall contain a statement of at least all of the following . . . ." (Emphasis added.) The term "shall" "denote[s] a mandatory, rather than discretionary action." Roberts I, 466 Mich at 65. The term "all" exemplifies that each and every one of the statements required by § 2912b(4)(a) through (f) must be contained in the notice of intent. Therefore, only a notice of intent that is "in compliance with section 2912b" tolls the statute of limitations and a notice of intent must contain all of the statements required by § 2912b(4)(a) through (f) in order to be "in compliance with section 2912b."
Because, as discussed earlier, the notice of intent in this case does not contain the statements required by § 2912b(4)(a) and (b) with regard to HVR, it is not "in compliance with section 2912b." Because the notice of intent is not "in compliance with section 2912b," the notice of intent does not toll the statute of limitations. And because the period of limitations in a medical malpractice action is two years, MCL 600.5805(6), and the alleged malpractice in this case occurred on June 7, 2001, and the complaint was not filed until November 4,  2003, the complaint was untimely filed, and the action against HVR is barred by the statute of limitations.  Therefore, the action against HVR should be dismissed with prejudice.
The Court of Appeals relied on Kirkaldy v Rim, 478 Mich 581; 734 NW2d 201 (2007), to support its conclusion that a defective notice of intent tolls the statute of limitations, and thus a dismissal without prejudice is appropriate. However, this case is significantly distinguishable from Kirkaldy. In Kirkaldy, 478 Mich at 586, this Court held that the filing of a complaint and a defective affidavit of merit tolls the statute of limitations until the affidavit of merit is successfully challenged. This is so because nothing in MCL 600.5856(a), which provides for tolling upon the filing of a complaint, 12  or MCL 600.2912d, which requires an affidavit of merit to be filed with a complaint, 13  limits tolling to an affidavit that is in compliance with § 2912d. However, § 5856(d) does limit tolling to a notice of intent that is "in compliance with section 2912b." Therefore,  while the filing of a complaint and a defective affidavit of merit may toll the statute of limitations, the serving of a defective notice of intent does not.
Justice Young contends that the statute of limitations was tolled with regard to HVR because, although the notice of intent was insufficient as to HVR, it was sufficient as to defendant Murry. That is, he concludes that as long as a notice of intent is sufficient as to one of the defendants, the statute of limitations is tolled as to all of the defendants. I respectfully disagree.
As discussed above, § 5856 provided at the time of the filing of the complaint, in pertinent part:
The statutes of limitations or repose are tolled:
* * *
(d) If during the applicable notice period under section 2912b, a claim would be barred by the statute of limitations or repose, for not longer than a number of days equal to the number of days in the applicable notice period after the date notice is given in compliance with section 2912b. [Emphasis added.]
Justice Young is correct that § 5856 does indicate that "more than one statute of limitations can be tolled . . . ." Ante at 14. For example, if multiple defendants receive a notice of intent that is sufficient as to all of them, all of their statutes of limitations are tolled. However, this does not mean that "more than one statute of limitations" is always tolled. Obviously, if there is only one defendant, only one statute of limitations would be tolled, and such a conclusion is not contrary to the reference in § 5856 to the "statutes of limitations." See MCL 8.3b, which provides that "every word importing the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number." Similarly, concluding that a notice of intent only tolls the statute  of limitations  that applies to the defendant who has actually received a sufficient notice of intent, but not the statute of limitations that applies to the defendant who has not received such a notice, is also not inconsistent with the reference in § 5856 to the "statutes of limitations." Further, such a conclusion is required by the reference in § 5856(d) to "the applicable notice period under section 2912b," and "the applicable notice period after the date notice is given in compliance with section 2912b," because there is no "applicable notice period under section 2912b," if the notice of intent is not "in compliance with section 2912b."
As discussed earlier, § 2912b states, in pertinent part:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not commence an action alleging medical malpractice against a health professional or health facility unless the person has given the health professional or health facility written notice under this section not less than 182 days before the action is commenced.
* * *
(4) The notice given to a health professional or health facility under this section shall contain a statement of at least all of the following . . . .
Accordingly, as this Court held in Roberts I, 466 Mich at 64, a notice of intent only tolls the statute of limitations if the notice contains all the statements required by § 2912b(4). In addition, as this Court held in Roberts II, 470 Mich at 692, the notice of intent must contain all of the statements required by § 2912b(4) as to "each particular [defendant] named in the notice." (Emphasis added.) That is, the notice of intent only tolls the statute of limitations as to each particular defendant if the notice contains all the statements required by § 2912b(4) as to each particular defendant. Thus, if a  notice of intent contains all the required statements as to the defendant physician, but does not contain all the required statements as to the defendant professional corporation, the statute of limitations would only be tolled as to the defendant physician because a notice "in compliance with section 2912b" has not been served on the defendant professional corporation and thus there is no "applicable notice period" as to the defendant professional corporation.
Contrary to Justice Young's contention, § 5856(d)'s reference to "a claim" does not alter the outcome. 14  The language "a  claim" must be read in context. To which "claim" is § 5856(d) referring? When § 5856(d) is read in its entirety, it is clear that the "claim" to which it is referring is the "claim" that "would be barred by the statute of limitations" "during the applicable notice period under section 2912b." However, "a claim" would  not be "barred by the statute of limitations" "during the applicable notice period under section 2912b" where a sufficient notice of intent had not yet been served upon the defendant. Where a sufficient notice of intent had not yet been served upon the defendant, there would be no "applicable notice period under section 2912b" and, thus, there would be no claim that would be "barred by the statute of limitations" "during the applicable notice period." 15  Because I believe that "a claim" in § 5856(d) is referring to "a claim" that would be "barred by the statute of limitations" "during the applicable notice period," and the claim against HVR would not have been "barred by the statute of limitations" "during the applicable notice period" (because there was no "applicable notice period"), I conclude that the statute of limitations was not tolled as to plaintiff's claim against HVR. 16  
Moreover, under Justice Young's analysis, although HVR is not even entitled to a notice of intent because it is a professional corporation, he would hold that under § 5856(d) a notice of intent that does not comply with § 2912b tolls the statute of limitations applicable to  HVR. That is, he concludes that, although HVR is not entitled to a notice of intent, plaintiff still gets the benefit of notice of intent tolling. This conclusion, in which the defendant is denied the benefit of a notice of intent, and yet the plaintiff is afforded the benefit of an extended period of limitations, is illogical and inconsistent with the statute. 17  The whole reason for providing a plaintiff with notice of intent tolling is to compensate for the fact that he or she must file a notice of intent 182 days before filing a complaint. If, however, a plaintiff does not have to file a notice of intent and then wait 182 days before filing a complaint, why should the plaintiff be afforded 182 more days in which to file the complaint?
Justice Young observes that the "majority's analysis threatens to render the statutory notice procedure nugatory and undermines, if not overrules, this Court's  precedent," ante at 2-3, and that it "threatens to deprive a named defendant of the notice that the statutory procedure is designed to provide," ante at 23. Although I agree with these observations, I believe that the same possibly can be said of Justice Young's own analysis. 18  He concludes that a notice of intent that is sufficient as to one defendant tolls the statute of limitations for all the defendants, regardless of how defective  the notice of intent is as to these other defendants or whether these other defendants were even entitled to a notice of intent in the first place. That is, although § 2912b(4) and Roberts II clearly require the plaintiff to provide all defendants with a notice of intent that is sufficient as to each, and although § 5856(d) and Roberts I clearly limit tolling to notices that are "given in compliance with section 2912b," Justice Young concludes that a notice of intent that is clearly not "in compliance with section 2912b" as to multiple defendants nevertheless tolls the statute of limitations as to these defendants as long as at least one defendant is given a notice of intent that is "in compliance with section 2912b." How are other defendants to receive the "notice that the statutory procedure is designed to provide"? 19  
 D. Retroactive Amendments
 Although the majority does not address this issue because it concludes that the notice of intent is sufficient, in Bush v Shabahang, 484 Mich.     n 45; 763 N.W.2d 633 (2009), decided July 29, 2009 (Docket Nos. 136617, 136653, and 136983),484 Mich. 156; 772 N.W.2d 272; 2009 Mich. LEXIS 1598, the majority concludes that, pursuant to MCL 600.2301, a plaintiff can simply amend a defective notice of intent and such amendment will "relate back to the time that the original NOI was mailed" or the courts alternatively can  simply "disregard any error or defect" in the notice of intent. I respectfully disagree. See Bush, 484 Mich at    , slip op at 12-13. MCL 600.2301 provides:
The court in which any action or proceeding is pending, has power to amend any process, pleading or proceeding in such action or proceeding, either in form or substance, for the furtherance of justice, on such terms as are just, at any time before judgment rendered therein. The court at every stage of the action or proceeding shall disregard any error or defect in the proceedings which do not affect the substantial rights of the parties. [Emphasis added.]
As this Court explained in Boodt, 481 Mich at 563 n 4, "§ 2301 only applies to pending actions." As discussed above, § 2912b(1) provides, "a person shall not commence an action alleging medical malpractice against a health professional or health facility unless the person  has given the health professional or health facility written notice under this section not less than 182 days before the action is commenced." (Emphasis added.) Section 2912b(4) states that the "notice given to a health professional or health facility under this section shall contain a statement of at least all of the following . . . ." (Emphasis added.) Therefore, as we explained in Boodt, 481 Mich at 562-563, "a plaintiff cannot commence an action before he or she files a notice of intent that contains all the information required under § 2912b(4)." 20  Because plaintiff's notice of intent here did not contain all the information required under § 2912b(4) as to HVR, plaintiff could not have commenced a medical malpractice action against HVR. 21  Therefore, § 2301 is inapplicable, and plaintiff cannot retroactively amend the notice of intent and the courts cannot "disregard any error or defect" in the notice of intent.
E. Majority Procedures
As noted in n 1 of this opinion, the majority addresses issues that are not even properly before it. In Docket No. 136336, plaintiff appealed the portion of the Court of Appeals decision that held that the notice of intent was defective as to HVR, and in Docket Nos. 136338 and  136339, defendants appealed the portion of the decision that held that the defective notice of intent tolled the statute of limitations, and thus that a dismissal without prejudice was appropriate, and the portion that held that the notice of intent was sufficient as to defendant Murry. In Docket No. 136336, we granted plaintiff's application "limited to the issue whether defendant Huron Valley Radiology, P.C., is a 'health facility or agency' to which a plaintiff is required to provide notice under MCL 600.2912b(1)." 482 Mich. 1004, 756 N.W.2d 87 (2008) (emphasis added). In Docket Nos. 136338 and 136339, we held defendants' application in abeyance for plaintiff's application. 756 NW2d 85 (2008). Subsequently, in Docket No. 136336, we directed the parties to file briefs addressing "whether, if a defendant professional corporation is not an entity to  whom notice is required to be provided under MCL 600.2912b, the applicable statute of limitations, MCL 600.5805(6), was nonetheless subject to statutory tolling provided in former MCL 600.5856(d)." 483 Mich. 922, 762 N.W.2d 923 (2009). However, we never asked the parties to address the sufficiency of the notice of intent as to either HVR or Murry. As a result, the parties did not, in fact, brief or argue these issues. See n 1 of this opinion.
Thus, despite the fact that the parties have not had an opportunity to brief or argue these issues, and, indeed, despite the fact that the issue regarding the sufficiency of the notice of intent as to defendant Murry has been formally abeyed, the majority nonetheless addresses these issues and implicitly overrules Roberts II in the process. 22  The majority implicitly overrules  Roberts II by refusing to follow its holdings: (a) that a notice of intent must indicate whether the plaintiff is seeking to hold the defendant professional corporation vicariously or directly liable, and instead holding that as long as the plaintiff is only going to sue the defendant on the basis of vicarious liability it does not have to indicate this in the notice of intent; and (b) that a notice of intent must contain all the statements required by § 2912b(4), and instead holding that a notice of intent is sufficient as long as the defendant "could reasonably be held to comprehend the nature of the claims being asserted against it." Ante at 26. The majority does this without so much as a mention of stare decisis. What happened to the view that "[t]he Michigan Supreme Court should not alter the precedent . . . without first hearing oral argument and inviting briefing on it"? Scott v State Farm Mut Auto Ins Co, 482 Mich 1074, 1076-1077; 758 N.W.2d 249 (2008) (Kelly, J., dissenting). What happened to the view that by "fail[ing] to comprehend how the skilled advocates in this case could have added anything insightful in the debate over the proper interpretation of . . . precedent . . . the majority undermines the foundations of our adversarial system"? Mack v Detroit, 467 Mich 186, 223; 649 NW2d 47 (2002) (Cavanagh, J., dissenting). Apparently, these views are only pertinent where precedents with which the majority agrees are at stake. 23  
  To summarize my concerns with the majority opinion: (1) it addresses issues that have neither been brief nor argued; (2) it addresses an issue that was formally abeyed; (3) it violates one of this Court's internal rules by reversing the Court of Appeals on an issue that has neither been briefed nor argued, without the required five votes and in the absence of any emergency circumstances; (4) it concludes that HVR was entitled to a notice of intent simply because this is a medical malpractice action and because the words "professional corporation" can be found in § 5838a, without any discussion of whether HVR is either a "health professional or health facility" under § 2912b(1); (5) it concludes that the requirement of § 2912b(4)(a) that the notice of intent contain a statement of the "factual basis for the claim" does not require a statement indicating that the reason that the defendant professional corporation is being sued is because the defendant physician  was working at the corporation at the time of the alleged malpractice; (6) it concludes that the requirement of § 2912b(4)(b) that the notice of intent contain a statement of  the "applicable standard of practice or care" does not require a statement indicating whether the plaintiff is seeking to hold the defendant professional corporation directly or vicariously liable; (7) it relies upon a distinction without any difference to conclude that Roberts II is not dispositive; (8) it questions whether Roberts II was correctly decided with regard to whether a notice of intent must be particularized, leaving the bench and bar at a loss as to whether Roberts II remains good law on this issue; and (9) it implicitly overrules Roberts II's holding that a notice of intent must indicate whether the plaintiff is seeking to hold the defendant professional corporation vicariously or directly liable and its holding that a notice of intent must contain all of the statements required by § 2912b(4), without any mention whatsoever of stare decisis.
IV. CONCLUSION
Although the notice of intent was sufficient as to defendant Murry, it was insufficient as to defendant HVR. As this Court held in Roberts I, a defective notice of intent does not toll the statute of limitations. Because the complaint was filed more than two years after the alleged malpractice occurred, the action against HVR is time-barred. Accordingly, I would affirm the portions of the Court of Appeals opinion that held that the notice of intent was sufficient as to defendant Murry and insufficient as to defendant HVR, but reverse the portions that held that the defective notice of intent tolled the statute of limitations and thus that a dismissal without prejudice  was appropriate. The action against HVR should be dismissed with prejudice.
Stephen J. Markman

 

