, Jr.  
Concur




Young, C.J. (concurring).
I concur with the majority opinion because I believe that the Commissioner of the Office of Financial and Insurance Services (OFIS) 1  erroneously concluded that minimum employer contribution requirements are inconsistent with the small employer group health coverage act (SEGHCA) 2  because noncompliance with a minimum employer contribution requirement is not listed among the exceptions to the guaranteed renewal provisions contained in the act. 3  I offer several observations for the commissioner to consider on remand.
The petitioner in this matter, a Michigan health maintenance organization (HMO), requires that all small employers 4  pay either 75 percent of the single premium  amount or 50 percent of the total premium amount, at the employer's option, as a condition of coverage. A small employer cannot obtain health insurance from petitioner unless the employer agrees to pay 50 or 75 percent of the premium, 5  even if the premiums are otherwise paid in full.
The SEGHCA establishes various requirements for carriers 6  that offer health insurance benefit plans 7  to small employers in Michigan. As a condition of transacting business with small employers in Michigan, a small employer provider is required to offer its entire menu of small employer health plans to any small employer. MCL 500.3707(1) provides:
As a condition of transacting business in this state with small employers, every small employer carrier shall make available to small employers all health benefit plans it markets to small employers in this state. A small employer carrier shall be considered to be marketing a health benefit plan if it offers that plan to a small employer not currently receiving a health benefit plan from that small employer carrier. A small employer carrier shall issue any health benefit plan to any small employer that applies for the plan and agrees to make the required premium payments and to satisfy the other reasonable provisions of the health benefit plan not inconsistent with this chapter [chapter 37 of the Insurance Code, MCL 500.100 et seq.]. 8 
Thus, under the SEGHCA, an insurer "shall issue" health insurance coverage to any small employer who does three things: (1) applies for the plan, (2) agrees to make the required premium payments, and (3) satisfies the other reasonable provisions of the health benefit plan not inconsistent with chapter 37, in which the SEGHCA is codified.
The issue in this case is whether requiring a minimum employer contribution as a condition of coverage is a "reasonable provision" that is not "inconsistent with" chapter 37 of the Insurance Code. By including the adjective "reasonable," the Legislature has indicated  that the reasonableness of small employer health insurance plan provisions may be considered and evaluated, even if the contractual provision at issue does not otherwise conflict with the statutory provisions contained in the SEGHCA. 9 
 However, it is not within the purview of the judicial branch to determine whether a particular insurance provision is "reasonable." Rather, "the explicit 'public policy' of Michigan is that the reasonableness of insurance contracts is a matter for the executive, not judicial, branch of government." 10  This is because "the Legislature has assigned the responsibility of evaluating the 'reasonableness' of an insurance contract to the person within the executive branch charged with reviewing and approving insurance policies: the Commissioner of Insurance." 11 
Moreover, the commissioner's determination regarding the reasonableness of a contractual provision is entitled to great deference under the limited standard of review that Michigan courts apply when reviewing the decisions of administrative agencies. 12  If the commissioner were to conclude on remand that compulsory minimum employer contributions are not "reasonable," the petitioner would bear the burden of establishing  that its substantial rights have been prejudiced 13  because the commissioner's reasonableness determination was "[a]rbitrary, capricious or clearly an abuse or unwarranted exercise of discretion." 14  The commissioner's declaratory ruling identified several factors that could support a determination that the imposition of minimum employer contribution requirements is not reasonable.
Because it is the responsibility of the commissioner to make the determination in the first instance regarding whether a minimum employer contribution requirement is a "reasonable provision" that is not "inconsistent with" the SEGHCA, I concur with the majority opinion and concur in remanding this case for reconsideration of petitioner's motion for declaratory judgment.
Robert P. Young, Jr.

 

