, Jr.; Stephen J. Markman  
Concur




 Young, C.J. (concurring).
 The judicial philosophical dilemma in statutory interpretation is . . . whether the "jurist interpreter" will be faithful to the actual statutory text and thus the intent of the lawgiver, or whether the jurist will be faithful to his or her own subjective policy desires.
-Robert P. Young, Jr., A Judicial Traditionalist Confront Justice Brennan's School of Judicial Philosophy.1 
The dissents of Judge Markey in the Court of Appeals and Justice Marilyn Kelly in this Court illustrate the interpretive "dilemma" that I describe above when judges choose to ignore the statutory words.
I concur in this Court's order vacating our prior order in this case and denying leave to appeal. This is a simple case. MCL 500.3009(2) clearly and unambiguously requires that insurance companies place particular statutorily specified notice language in certain insurance policy documents when excluding a named driver pursuant to that provision.2  Progressive, the insurer, failed to comply with this requirement and is thus required to pay the claim. I write to respond to the dissents in the Court of Appeals and this Court.
There is no ambiguity in the requirement that the Legislature's precise statutory disclaimer must be used in insurance policy documents in order to effectuate the exclusion of a bad driver. In this case, Progressive failed to include the required statutory disclaimer but paraphrased it, suggesting that its paraphrase was "close enough" to avoid paying the claim. The dissents here and in the Court of Appeals believe that "close enough" is as valid in law as it is in horseshoes.
However, the majority of the Court of Appeals correctly held that, because the notice language employed on the insured's certificate of insurance in this case deviated from that statutory language, Progressive did not comply with the statutory notice requirement. Thus, the court was obligated to enforce the Legislature's directive that the named driver exclusion "shall not be valid."3  Progressive was required to pay the claim of the imperfectly excluded bad driver and appealed here from that decision.
The dissenting opinion of Judge Markey in the Court of Appeals, although professing an adherence to the philosophy of interpreting the law as plainly written, nevertheless ignored the statutory language:
[O]n rare occasion there may arise a situation where following this philosophy with myopic rigidity effects not only a  complete thwarting of the Legislature's intent but also a profoundly unfair and inequitable result. . . . Must we as strict constructionists abandon "common sense" and render a decision not only remarkably hyper-technical legally but also profoundly unjust and jarring to what I will presume to say is the average person's sense of justice and fair play? I think not."4 
While my concurring colleague may argue that the result urged by the dissent is not so unreasonable, statements such as this represent a shocking departure from the rule of law.5  All Michigan citizens should be extraordinarily troubled by any judge who advances the notion that the rule of law must be enforced unless a judge finds an outcome in a particular case to be one of which he personally disapproves. In a constitutional republic, judges have no such authority, and the rule of law crumbles where a constitutional, validly enacted statutory mandate can be ignored simply because it offends a judge's sensibilities—even if on "rare occasion[s]."
With all due respect to Judge Markey, our judicial oaths require judges to enforce the Legislature's policy choices, even when we may personally find the outcome in a given case "unjust," "inequitable," "jarring," "hyper-technical," or contrary to what we intuit an "average person's" sensibilities to be.6  As this Court has stated, it is a mere "caricature" of judicial restraint for a judge "to assert that her common sense should be allowed to override the language of the statute."7 
As Judge Murray aptly noted in his concurring opinion in the Court of Appeals, our judicial duty is more than to "almost always" apply a statute's unambiguous words to the facts presented.8  The law must always guide the outcome, regardless of whether a judge perceives that outcome in a given case to be formalistic or "inequitable."
 This Court has prided itself on its commitment to the rule of law, and in particular a return to fundamental constitutional principles regarding judicial interpretation of statutes.9  This has been true even where, as a personal matter, a Justice may be discomforted by the ultimate result.10  But in a government characterized by the separation of powers, the people of this state elect judges to enforce the law as the political branches of our government have given it to us.
The rule of law requires a judge to be subservient to the law itself, not the law to be subservient to the personal views of a judge.
Markman, J. (concurring).
Although I reach the same result as the Chief Justice, and, even had I not, I would have articulated my position much differently than do the dissents in this Court and in the Court of Appeals, I nonetheless respectfully believe that the Chief Justice is overly severe in his criticism of these dissents.
The issue here is whether an insurance policy stating that an owner of an insured vehicle, under specified circumstances, remains "personally responsible" conforms with a statute requiring that all policies must communicate that an owner, under these circumstances, remains "personally liable." In my judgment, plaintiff-insurer's insurance policy did not satisfy the statute because an exact identity in language is required in the instant circumstances, in which an insurance statute has specified precise language for inclusion in such a policy. However, I also believe that this is a case in which a judge who adheres to the interpretative philosophy articulated by the Chief Justice, as do I, may quite reasonably disagree with his, and my, conclusion. In fairly giving meaning to the law, the obligation of the "textualist" or "interpretivist" is not to read the law "literally" or "narrowly," or to engage in "strict construction," but it is simply to read the law "reasonably." In light of this premise, I do not believe that either of the dissents has reached an indefensible conclusion. A judge who views the difference between "liability" and "responsibility" as being of no reasonable consequence in the insurance policy at issue is not "ignoring words," engaging in a "shocking departure from the rule of law," or otherwise acting in disregard of his or her "oath of office." Nor do I believe, as suggested by the Chief Justice's citation to People v McIntire, that a judge who undertakes within the most narrow realm to consider the genuine "absurdity" of a result is acting in violation of his or her judicial powers. See Cameron v Auto Club Ins Ass'n, 476 Mich 55, 78-86; 718 N.W.2d 784 (2006) (Markman, J., concurring). While I respect the Chief Justice's convictions — and while I appreciate his apparently-approving references to my own past jurisprudential statements, to which I continue to adhere — I also believe that there are many better cases in which to bring those convictions to bear.
