, Jr.    
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from what I believe to be the majority's unpersuasive effort to fit the parties' tuition contract into the prohibition contained in MCL 408.478(1); MSA 17.277(8)(1). 1  Because theterms of the tuition contract clearly do not resemble a "fee, gift, tip, gratuity, or other remuneration or consideration," I would hold that the contract does not violate subsection 8(1) and would affirm the Court of Appeals decision on this basis.
 What I find most troubling about the majority's analysis is its use of the statutory construction principle of ejusdem generis. I think that the majority's approach represents the exact opposite of that principle. 2  As a condition of employment, plaintiff required defendant to agree either to work for six years or to pay for some part of the cost of the training that was provided to him. The majority's conclusion, that this independent agreement is a "consideration" in the nature of a fee, gift, tip, or gratuity, does not square with a natural reading of these more specific, but ordinary, statutory terms.
Fees, gifts, tips, and gratuities all connote something given to an employer for which the employee, other than the job itself, gets nothing in return. Thus, I agree with the majority that the statute is designed to "prevent kickbacks or payments of any kind to an employer in return for employment or its continuation." Slip op at 11. Stated otherwise, the statute plainly seeks to prevent employers from selling jobs by extracting things of value from an employee as a condition of employment or continued employment. The parties' tuition contract is far different and is notin any ordinary sense a gift. In return for his agreement to the terms of the tuition contract, defendant, a nineteen-year-old high school graduate, received something very valuable separate and apart from a job: extensive training in appliance repair that enabled  him to advance from making $ 7 an hour as an apprentice to some $ 50,000 a year as an appliance repair journeyman two and a half years later. 3  Thus, in my view, whether plaintiff also received a benefit--defendant's commitment either to work for six years or pay for his training--is irrelevant because this commitment was not in the nature of a fee, gift, tip, or gratuity.
 The majority rejects this logic on the ground that it would make "an absurdity of the statute," make the statute "ineffectual in accomplishing the employee protection intended," and otherwise "thwart the statute's operation." Slip op at 14, n 8. However, we rejected such methods of statutory construction in People v McIntire, 461 Mich. 147, 156, n 8; 599 N.W.2d 102 (1999). Once the majority's reliance on what Ibelieve is an unexpressed legislative intent is cast aside, it becomes obvious that the parties' agreement does not even remotely resemble a fee, gift, tip, or gratuity given in exchange for the privilege of employment. Rather, it is an agreement designed merely to  ensure that an employer's costs will be at least partially offset in the event that an employee who has been heavily subsidized in his training leaves such employment before those subsidies can be fully amortized.
In sum, because I read the statute to preclude only gift- like boons to an employer and not agreements of the kind at issue here, I dissent.
CORRIGAN, J., concurred with YOUNG, J.  

 

