  
Concur




Young, J., concurs and states as follows:
I concur in the Court's decision to deny leave to appeal in this case. This case arises from the sale of a home and land from the estate of plaintiff's father. Plaintiff, in his capacity as personal representative of his father's estate, sold the home and land to his relatives by personal representative deed. In this action, plaintiff claims that the personal representative deed mistakenly included 40 acres of plaintiff's own property along with the estate's property. Thus, the primary issue was whether the 40-acre parcel was included in the deed mistakenly or intentionally. The trial court found that "[d]efendants have not presented an offer to purchase or any documentary evidence that supports their position. Overwhelming evidence persuades the Court that the personal representative's deed included the farmland legal description by mistake. Defendants simply tried to take advantage of the mistake after it occurred." (Emphasis added.) Justice Markman cites the deed as factual support for defendants' claim that the 40 acres were intentionally included in the deed and asserts that "it was hardly frivolous for defendants to rely upon [the deed] to identify the extent of the property that had been purchased." However, the deed itself does not refute plaintiff's claim that the deed contained a mistake, and defendants have simply not provided any evidence to show that the description was anything other than a mistake. Justice Markman also cites a July 2001 letter from the estate's attorney indicating that those 40 acres were estate property to be given to plaintiff after the mortgage was satisfied. However, the parties did not enter a purchase agreement until September 2002. In the interim, the quitclaim deed from the father to plaintiff was  recorded on December 26, 2001. After the deed was recorded, it was wholly unreasonable for defendants to rely on the clearly erroneous letter. 1 
Therefore, the trial court correctly found that there was overwhelming evidence that the deed contained a mistake and that defendants simply tried to take advantage of that mistake. This point is made emphatic by the fact that plaintiff had received his property from his father by inter vivos gift and did not take under his father's will. Defendants, relatives of plaintiff, fully knew this fact and the only argument justifying enforcing the deed is that plaintiff intended to donate his land as a gift to the estate in which he had no interest. The trial court was thus fully justified in finding defendants' claim frivolous because they "had no reasonable basis to believe that the facts underlying [their] legal position were in fact true."  MCL 600.2591(3)(a)(ii) (emphasis added).
Because there has been no showing that the trial court clearly erred in finding that the defendants had no evidence to support their position that the description in the deed was not a mistake, sanctions are appropriate.  
