
I concur with the order vacating the Court of Appeals order and affirming the  Wayne Circuit Court's dismissal of this case. I write separately to address Justice Markman's discussion of the implications of the collateral source rule on this case. Because the direct beneficiary of the collateral source rule, the city of Detroit, has not been a part of this case for some time, and because applying the collateral  source rule does not remedy the trial court's decision to reduce plaintiff State Automobile Mutual Insurance Company's (State Auto) lien, the collateral source rule is wholly irrelevant to the final disposition of this case.
The collateral source rule is designed to prevent double recovery by plaintiffs. After a trier of fact reaches a verdict for a plaintiff, the court must enter an order of judgment. MCL 600.6306(1). The judgment must contain a number of elements of damages, including "[a]ll past economic damages, less collateral source payments as provided for in section 6303." MCL 600.6306(1)(a). Section 6303 allows for "evidence to establish that [an] expense or loss was paid or is payable, in whole or in part, by a collateral source . . . ." MCL 600.6303(1). If the court determines that a portion of the past economic damages was paid by a collateral source, then the court must reduce the judgment by that amount. Id. However, payments subject to a statutory or contractual lien are not eligible for deduction as "collateral sources" under the statute. MCL 600.6303(4). This is because the amount due to the lien holder must still be paid.
After calculating the proper amount of the judgment, the court finds whether the attorney's contingent fee is "appropriate," by determining if the fee is one-third or less of "the net sum recovered after deducting from the amount recovered all disbursements properly chargeable to the enforcement of the claim or prosecution of the action." MCR 8.121(C)(1) (emphasis added). After subtracting the appropriate costs and attorney fee, the remainder of the judgment belongs to the plaintiff, subject to any liens. Therefore, any reduction in the liens inures to the benefit of the plaintiff, not his or her attorney.
In this case, defendant Geoffrey N. Fieger successfully represented the estate of John Rogers in a lawsuit against the city of Detroit for Rogers's wrongful death. Plaintiff State Auto was Rogers's insurer and had paid $ 450,000 in benefits. Pursuant to the insurance contract, State Auto had a right of reimbursement for any damages recovered by Rogers, up to the amount of the benefits paid. After the verdict in favor of Rogers, the city of Detroit sought to reduce the judgment by State Auto's payment. This Court held that even though Fieger did not provide the proper statutory notice of the verdict to the lien holders, the trial court did not abuse its discretion by extending the period for lien holders to assert their rights. Rogers v Detroit, 457 Mich. 125, 156-157; 579 N.W.2d 840 (1998). Therefore, on remand, the Wayne Circuit Court refused to allow the city a setoff for State Auto's insurance payments in the judgment. After the city paid the judgment, the court allowed Fieger to deduct his costs and attorney fee pursuant to the contingency fee contract between Rogers and Fieger. See MCR 8.121(C)(1). The remaining amount was Rogers's, subject to the liens. Instead of allowing the lien holders to recover the full amount of their liens, the court reduced them by one-third, increasing Rogers's recovery. Fieger could not benefit from the reduction in State Auto's recovery because he already received his attorney fee.
Justice Markman apparently disagrees with this Court's decision in Rogers regarding the collateral source rule, arguing that State Auto's payment was in fact a  collateral source. I fail to see how overruling that holding would affect the disposition of this case in any way. If State Auto's  payment was a collateral source, then the court would have reduced the judgment against the city of Detroit by $ 450,000. The court would have then allowed Fieger to deduct his costs and attorney fees. The remaining amount would have been distributed among the lien holders and Rogers (assuming that State Auto would not lose its right to recovery under MCL 600.6303(3)). If the court again reduced the liens by one-third, State Auto would still only recovery $ 300,000. 3  Justice Markman is correct that Fieger's attorney fee would be reduced by $ 150,000 under this scenario; however, the beneficiary of that reduction would have been the city of Detroit, not State Auto. 4  
The collateral source rule does not advance State Auto's theory that Fieger was the beneficiary of the $ 150,000 reduction of its lien. The only party that benefited from that reduction was Rogers.
Markman, J., concurs and states as follows:
Although I concur with the dismissal of this complex dispute, I respectfully disagree with the Court's order, which states that defendant received a "proper attorney fee based on the total recovery less costs."
The collateral source rule, MCL 600.6303(1), requires a court to determine whether any damages have been paid by a collateral source, such as an insurance company, and, if so, to reduce a judgment by the amount that has been paid by the collateral source. This rule operates to reduce the amount of money an attorney representing a plaintiff on a contingent fee basis will recover. This is because an attorney working for a contingent fee is entitled to a percentage of the judgment; however, if the "judgment" is reduced as it is under the collateral source rule, the contingent fee will necessarily be reduced as well.
The instant dispute presents a significant issue under MCL 600.6303(1) - where there has been a payment from a collateral source, should a contingent attorney fee be calculated on the basis of the judgment or on the basis of the judgment less the collateral source payment? On the one hand, plaintiff's attorney can fairly be said to be  responsible for the recovery of the entire judgment and entitled to his contractual share; on the other hand, that portion of the judgment embodying the collateral source payment presumably has already been made available to the plaintiff and thus plaintiff cannot be said to have been enriched to that extent by his attorney's efforts. To allow an attorney to recover a contingent fee based on the judgment,  rather than the judgment less the collateral source payment, would effectively require plaintiff to pay more than the contingency percentage of the amount by which he has benefited from the judgment.
In MCL 600.6303(1), the Legislature seems to have determined that a contingent fee should not be calculated on the portion of a judgment already paid from a collateral source. Therefore, the trial court in the instant case erred by not reducing plaintiff's judgment by the amount received from a collateral source. Because plaintiff's attorney in the underlying action (the defendant in the instant action) received an attorney fee based on the total judgment, rather than the judgment less the amount received from a collateral source, he did not receive a "proper attorney fee," as the majority asserts.
Plaintiff here sues defendant to recover $ 150,000 that plaintiff alleges defendant improperly received as an attorney fee in an earlier case. In that case, plaintiff held a $ 450,000 lien on a judgment because of uninsured motorist benefits that it had paid to the original plaintiff. After the Wayne Circuit Court distributed approximately $ 300,000 to plaintiff from the judgment, plaintiff filed a complaint against defendant in the Oakland Circuit Court, alleging that defendant improperly received the missing $ 150,000 as an attorney fee. The Oakland Circuit Court held that the complaint could proceed in that forum. However, on appeal from that holding, the Court of Appeals ruled that plaintiff had improperly filed the complaint in Oakland County and that it must instead commence an action for relief from judgment in Wayne County, where the original case had been tried. Plaintiff then filed suit against defendant in Wayne County. The Wayne Circuit Court dismissed the action, but the Court of Appeals ordered a remand to that court, and directed the trial court to rule on several issues. Plaintiff appealed to this Court, arguing that two of the issues raised had been decided previously in its favor, and hence constituted law of the case. This Court ordered a remand to the trial court to rule on two issues and retained jurisdiction. After the trial court held a hearing, the case returned to this Court.
MCL 600.6303(1) applies when: (1) the original plaintiff commenced a personal injury action to recover for economic loss and (2) a portion of that loss was paid by a collateral source. The original plaintiff here sought recovery for economic loss arising from the decedent's wrongful death in a car accident involving employees of the city of Detroit, and plaintiff paid $ 450,000 in uninsured motorist benefits to the original plaintiff. Therefore, § 6303(1) applies. 5  
  Because MCL § 6303(1) applies in the instant case, the trial court should have reduced the judgment by the amount paid by the collateral source, i.e., plaintiff. In this case, however, the Wayne Circuit Court did not reduce the judgment by the amount paid by plaintiff. Consequently,  defendant received an attorney fee based on the total judgment, rather than the judgment less the collateral source payment.
In his concurrence, Justice Young claims that "the collateral source rule is wholly irrelevant to the final disposition of this case," ante at 5, because Rogers, the plaintiff in the underlying case, not defendant, benefited from the failure to apply the collateral source rule. Ante at 6. I respectfully disagree. Because defendant received one-third of the total judgment, rather than one-third of the redefined judgment under MCL 600.6303(1), it is clear that he benefited from the court's failure to apply the collateral source rule. 6  
 Although defendant was improperly awarded an attorney fee, dismissal nonetheless seems warranted. The Court of Appeals decision expressly ordered plaintiff "to commence an action for relief from judgment pursuant to MCR 2.612(C)(1)(f)" in the Wayne Circuit Court. Because the Court of Appeals directed plaintiff to commence an action pursuant to this provision, plaintiff was obligated to comply with its procedures. MCR 2.612(C)(1) states that "[o]n motion and on just terms," a court "may relieve a party . . . from a final judgment, order, or proceeding." MCR 2.612(C)(1) requires plaintiff to file a "motion" in the underlying case. Yet, instead of filing a proper motion, plaintiff commenced an independent action against defendant. Plaintiff thus appears to have failed to comply with the order of the Court of Appeals. For this reason only, I concur with the result reached by this Court.   [*1070contd]   [**214contd]  
