
Consistent with the Court's 170-year-old disqualification practice, I do not participate in the determination whether Justice Hathaway should disqualify herself. I join in Justice Corrigan's dissenting statement concerning the Caperton 22  question.  I believe that this new United States Supreme Court opinion has radically altered the landscape of judicial disqualification and this change warrants that this Court at least entertain argument by the parties about how Caperton might affect the pending disqualification motion.
However, given Justice Hathaway's stated position on disqualification matters, I also write to raise questions about the casual way she has chosen to decide this motion and how her response may bear on the extraconstitutional disqualification proposals currently under consideration by this Court.
 Few issues have been the subject of more continual and contentious debate on this Court in the last decade than the appropriate standard that should apply in the disqualification of justices. 23  Justice Hathaway, who is now the subject of a disqualification motion in these cases, dismisses our efforts to comment on this issue as "inappropriate," "unnecessary," and a waste of taxpayer dollars. Such questions, however, are a traditional part of the debate and discussion inherent in the judicial process. It is, for example, why this Court holds oral arguments, and why it welcomes briefs, responses to briefs, and even replies to responses to briefs. By this process we educate ourselves and hopefully arrive at better decisions. Justice Hathaway either fails to appreciate the nature of the judicial process or simply seeks to avoid the hard questions about the inadequacies of her own extraordinarily limited response to the disqualification motion. This is particularly evident because one of the central themes of Justice Hathaway's late Michigan Supreme Court campaign was her assertion that she subscribed to an "appearance of impropriety" disqualification standard and was, therefore, "more ethical" than the members of the previous philosophical majority-- former Chief Justice Taylor and Justices Corrigan and Markman and I. 24  
 The Nature of the Allegations Against Justice Hathaway
Defendant Michigan Catastrophic Claims Association (MCCA) has asserted  that Justice Hathaway's husband is a no-fault plaintiffs' attorney who stands to profit in his no-fault practice if Justice Hathaway participates in these cases to overturn a decision made by this Court just months ago. The thrust of this claim is that a reversal of our earlier opinion will remove the legal basis, and thus the incentive, for insurance companies to resist unreasonable no-fault settlements demanded by claimants and their attorneys. Consequently, because insurance companies will be free to pass on these unreasonable settlements to the MCCA (which will eventually be paid for by the public, who must buy no-fault insurance), no-fault practitioners will increase their contingency fee yields by obtaining higher settlements than warranted. 25  A reversal will cost  purchasers of Michigan no-fault insurance an aggregate of $ 693.8 million more this year alone, accounting, in large part, for a more than 19 percent increase in the catastrophic claims premium every automobile no-fault insurance policy issued in this state will bear, which increase the MCCA's board of directors has already approved in anticipation of Justice Hathaway's critical vote to reverse the Court's prior decision. See the affidavit filed by the MCCA in Docket No. 133466, which is one of the documents referred to in fn 2 of this order.
Despite this, and without bothering to explain why, Justice Hathaway simply denies that she should be disqualified, adding that there is no appearance of impropriety in her participation. Justice Hathaway does not even deign to deny that her husband is a plaintiffs' no-fault practitioner or to assert that his practice will not benefit from her participation in a decision to overturn this Court's prior decision.
Justice Hathaway's refusal to live up to her own expressed standard of conduct is worthy of note in its own right: The people of this state deserve to know whether candidates promise one thing when running for office but deliver another when elected. But the far more important issue is the horror that would be visited on this Court if Justice Hathaway's preferred "appearance of impropriety" disqualification standard were actually adopted.
How May a Justice Rebut an "Appearance of Impropriety"?
Justice Hathaway has provided no information in response to defendant's allegations of her family's financial  interest in a reversal of the Court's prior decision; surely her terse and conclusory statement is not what the people envisioned when they elected a candidate vowing to adhere to a "higher" "appearance of impropriety" disqualification standard. Ought not such a standard require that the target of the disqualification motion provide financial statements 26  or that an evidentiary hearing  be conducted to determine the merit of the allegations of disqualification? 27  
What Suffices to Establish an "Appearance of Impropriety"?
According to Justice Hathaway, allegations of a spouse's "economic interest in the subject matter in controversy" or "more than de minimis interest that could be substantially affected by the proceeding"--grounds requiring recusal under MCR 2.003(B)(5) and (6)(c)--are so irrelevant as to not even merit a discussion in her statement. Ifs these allegations of increased  family profit as a result of her participation in these cases do not establish an appearance of impropriety, what would? 28  
Who Will Determine Whether There Is an "Appearance of Impropriety"?
For the first time to my knowledge, members of the Court have participated in the merits of a disqualification decision on a motion addressed to another justice. Although Justices Cavanagh and Weaver and Chief Justice Kelly have joined and endorsed Justice Hathaway's decision, they have done so solely on the basis of Justice Hathaway's statement without any additional inquiry into the merits of her participation or the allegations raised. In this, their participation is merely a rote ratification of Justice Hathaway's cursory denial of the motion to disqualify.
The new majority's approval of and participation in the merits of the determination whether Justice Hathaway should be disqualified, while an alteration of our traditions, is consistent with several of the Court's pending disqualification proposals that require full Court participation or that of the Chief Justice. 29  Without question, lodging such a determination with other justices of this Court will, at best, lead to gamesmanship to change the philosophical composition of the Court to alter the result in each such case. I ask: Would a 4-3 decision by the members of the Court favoring participation of a challenged justice cause the public to have greater or  lesser faith that the targeted justice should ethically participate?
How would such a procedure better serve the people of this state than the nearly 200-year-old current disqualification practice
These are but a few of the questions raised by Justice Hathaway's disposition of the pending motion to disqualify her. Given Justice Hathaway's campaign promises and our colleagues' published statements on disqualification over the years, not only the parties, but the public deserve more.
MARKMAN, J. Defendant has moved for Justice Hathaway's disqualification, arguing that "her spouse has an interest that could be substantially affected by the outcome of the proceedings." Justice Hathaway now denies this motion, concluding that she has "no personal bias or prejudice," that there is "no appearance of impropriety," and that there is "nothing alleged . . . that would cause any reasonable person to believe that there is a significant and disproportionate influence being asserted upon me," with little to no explanation. This decision must be viewed against a backdrop in which Justice Hathaway has been free in her criticism of other justices for their disqualification decisions. (For example, asserting  that the former Chief Justice of this Court was a "walking conflict of interest" because his wife worked for the Governor's office; stating that "our Supreme Court is not being fair and impartial . . . they are not recusing themselves and that is the problem; we need judges who are going to be fair and impartial in rendering their decisions and that is not happening"; and proclaiming that, "I have, and I will continue to disqualify myself whenever there is the appearance of impropriety.") 30  Justice Hathaway has also supported this Court's decision to propose new procedures that would require disqualification whenever there is an "appearance of impropriety." ADM File No. 2009-04; see 483 Mich 1203, 760 N.W.2d 498 (2009). Finally, the United States Supreme Court's decision a few weeks ago in Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U.S. 868, 129 S. Ct. 2252, 173 L. Ed. 2d 1208 (2009), held that disqualification must now be determined on the basis of "objective standards."
Given this backdrop, it is difficult to understand why Justice Hathaway believes that her conclusory response to defendant's motion is sufficient. Contrary to her justification for her unwillingness to explain her position ("I will not participate in this Court's practice of engaging in responses to comments of others which are inappropriate and unnecessary. This Court should discontinue devoting the state's limited resources to unproductive colloquy."), it is hardly to take the high ground for a justice to decline to address questions that have been raised by the parties and by other justices, and that are a direct outgrowth of that justice's own reform proposals, her own criticisms of other justices, and a recent decision of the United States Supreme Court. Given that Caperton was decided just a few weeks ago, and in fairness to the parties, I would direct the filing of supplemental briefs. Among the questions I would direct the parties to address are whether all justices must now participate in deciding another justice's disqualification and whether the justice who is the object of disqualification  may even participate. Absent such briefing, I am not yet prepared to deviate from this Court's practice of 172 years to the contrary. Therefore, I neither participate in nor address the merits of Justice Hathaway's decision not to grant defendant's motion.

 

