; Stephen J. Markman  
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
I respectfully dissent.
On December 29, 2008, this Court decided these cases. 1  Today, just a few months later, a new majority 2  reverses that decision and it does so without even affording the parties an opportunity to brief and argue why this reversal is warranted. Although not relevant to my analysis of the substantive issue in these cases, 3  the costs that the majority's decision will impose on Michigan drivers is relevant to assessing the majority's hurried approach and policy-based reversal of this  Court's prior decision. As I will discuss later, the majority's decision will cause every Michigan resident who owns and insures an automobile  to pay a 19 percent higher annual surcharge premium for mandatory catastrophic coverage. The cost of the majority's decision to those with insured automobiles will be an estimated $ 693.8 million more for the coming year alone. 4  
I. What Changed?
The facts have not changed. The text of the statute at issue has not changed. The parties' arguments have not changed. And the rationale advanced in the opinions of this Court has not changed. Yet, within a matter of months, a decision of this Court, thoughtfully briefed, argued, and considered by seven justices, is no longer worth the paper it was written on. Even the casual observer, however, does not really need to ask why. The reason is obvious: On January 1, 2009, the composition of this Court changed.
II. Why is this Case being Reheard?
This case was argued on October 1, 2008. On November 4, 2008, Justice Hathaway defeated then-Chief Justice Taylor in the election for his seat on this Court. This case was decided on December 29, 2008, with former Chief Justice Taylor casting his vote with the majority.
 The new majority's opinion today offers no new rationale or argument. In fact, it is merely an extended quotation of Justice Weaver's former dissent.
For over a century this Court has adhered to the principle that a motion for rehearing should be denied unless a party has raised an issue of fact or law that was not previously considered but which may affect the outcome. 5  Indeed, this Court codified that principle in our court rules. 6  
As Justice Weaver's former dissent in these cases and the majority's new opinion make obvious, the parties have not raised a new issue of fact or law to merit rehearing. The only difference is in the membership of this Court. As early as 1883, this Court had the wisdom to realize that such a change is not a proper ground for rehearing. In Peoples v Evening News Ass'n, 7  this Court's opinion on a motion for rehearing stated in its entirety:
 This case having been heard and decided when three judges only were sitting, and a change in the Court having taken place and a further change being [about] to occur on the first of January,  a motion is now made for a rehearing at the next January term before the full Court as it will then be constituted.
Held, unanimously, that a rehearing will not be ordered on the ground merely that a change of members of the bench has either taken place or is about to occur. 8 
By ordering rehearing simply because a change in the Court has taken place, the new majority has overruled the longstanding and clear principle of Peoples. 9  Will any change in an assigned judge now justify the reopening of a predecessor's ruling?
It is apparent that the new majority feels unencumbered by such principles--even one that has endured for more than 100 years. And, perhaps, its members no longer feel a need to be cosseted by the concerns and beliefs that they professed to have for the past decade when they were members of the philosophical minority of this Court. Indeed, Chief Justice Kelly once exclaimed that a recent decision of the Court being reconsidered "has hardly had time to become outmoded." 10  Justice Cavanagh similarly protested that "[i]f a majority of the Court believes that reconsideration should be granted, then I believe that the proper course would be to receive briefs and hear arguments on  the defendant's constitutional argument before remanding the case to the trial court." 11  
Because nothing in the facts, arguments, or legal rationale has changed, I continue to support this Court's original decision and do not feel the need to restate it in its entirety here.
III. Facts and Procedural History
The facts and procedural history of these consolidated appeals are simple, uncontested, and have been set out by this Court in detail three times.
The central question here is whether an insurance company that strikes a bad bargain with its insured may fob off on the Michigan Catastrophic Claims Association (MCCA), a nonprofit entity created by the Legislature to spread the costs associated  with catastrophic automobile injuries, these "unreasonable" expenses. In our earlier decision, we held that the MCCA had explicit  statutory authority to resist assuming responsibility for an insurance company's unreasonable payouts.
Plaintiff United States Fidelity Insurance & Guaranty Company (USF&G) entered into a consent judgment with its insured, Daniel Migdal, which resulted in USF&G paying $ 54.84 an hour for attendant care services. 12  Plaintiff Hartford Insurance Company of the Midwest (Hartford) entered into a settlement agreement with its insured, Robert Allen, which required that Hartford pay $ 30 an hour for attendant care services. The MCCA refused to indemnify USF&G and Hartford beyond a rate of $ 22.05 and $ 20 respectively, rejecting the higher amounts as "unreasonable."
Plaintiffs brought these actions seeking declaratory judgments that the MCCA was required to reimburse the full rate of attendant care services that they paid their insureds. The circuit courts entered conflicting judgments and the aggrieved parties appealed. The  Court of Appeals consolidated the appeals and held that "the MCCA is statutorily required to reimburse an insurer for 100 percent of the amount that the insurer paid in PIP [personal protection insurance] benefits to an insured in excess of the statutory threshold listed in MCL 500.3104(2), regardless of the reasonableness of these payments." 13  The MCCA sought leave to appeal in this Court, which was granted, and this Court held that "when a member insurer's policy only provides coverage for 'reasonable charges,' the MCCA has authority to refuse to indemnify unreasonable charges." 14  
Because the composition of this Court changed on January 1, 2009, USF&G and Hartford sought rehearing 15  and the new majority granted this motion "without further briefing or oral argument." 16  
IV. Discussion
As previously noted, at issue is whether the MCCA has the authority to refuse to  indemnify member insurers for unreasonable payments they make to their policyholders. I agree with many points of the majority's new opinion, but the points of my disagreement are significant and the results of our differences will be extremely costly to the citizens of Michigan.
 I agree that "personal protection insurance benefits" are not the same as "personal protection insurance coverages." 17  I further agree that "the term 'coverage' is a broader term than 'benefits.'" 18  I particularly agree with each of the definitions for "coverages" cited by the new majority. 19  "'[C]overage' refers to protection afforded by an insurance policy or the sum of risks assumed by an insurance policy." 20  I disagree, however, with the new majority's refusal to interpret "coverages" consistent with the definitions that it cites--a reference to the underlying insurance policy.
The majority states its holding: "the indemnification obligation set forth in MCL 500.3104(2) does not incorporate the reasonableness standard that MCL 500.3107 requires between claimants and member insurers." 21  That is true but unresponsive to this Court's holding in  USF&G I. This Court did not previously incorporate the § 3107 standard for personal protection insurance (PIP) benefits into § 3104(2). Rather, this Court, consistent with the definitions advanced by the majority, interpreted "coverages" as the "protection afforded by an insurance policy" and explained that "the member insurer's policy will ultimately control the standard for the MCCA's review because the policy establishes the 'personal protection insurance coverages.'" 22  
 Referring to the consent judgment and settlement agreement at issue, the new majority contends that "[t]his contractual liability, or coverage, owed by each insurer is the total amount agreed to between the original contracting parties." 23  The fallacy in this assertion is that the consent judgment or settlement agreement is "coverage." As amply demonstrated by the definitions that the majority cites, "coverage" refers to the underlying policy purchased by the insured. That policy is the only relevant contract. The consent judgment and settlement agreement are separate contractual, albeit judicially sanctioned, agreements. They are distinctly not "the no-fault personal protection insurance  coverages that are generally the subject of the act, i.e., those which were written in this state to provide the compulsory security requirements of § 3101(1) of the no-fault act for the 'owner or registrant of a motor vehicle required to be registered in this state' . . . ." 24  Because the majority offers no principled rationale for departing from the definitions that it cites or this Court's prior interpretation of "personal protection insurance coverages," I must respectfully dissent.
The majority makes additional erroneous assertions. First, the majority asserts that member insurers will have an incentive to make reasonable settlements of catastrophic claims because, if they do not, the MCCA premiums will increase. 25  The majority appears unaware of how incentives, or the MCCA, work. The premium that the MCCA charges to cover the liabilities it must statutorily assume is evenly distributed among the member insurers 26  and then passed on to those who  buy no-fault insurance. 27  Indeed, this Court has been informed that in response to the order granting rehearing in this case, the MCCA raised its rates by 19 percent per policy (or $ 693.8 million more per MCCA assessment in the aggregate for this year) to create the reserves necessary to pay the more expansive claims for unreasonable charges that the new majority's opinion  permits. Contrary to the new majority's belief that an insurer will have an economic incentive to bargain for "reasonable" payments to its insureds, the majority opinion will have the perverse effect of eliminating an insurer's incentive to negotiate reasonable settlements. Indeed, instead of providing insurers a protective shield against unreasonable catastrophic claims, the majority opinion provides plaintiffs' no-fault attorneys a lethal sword against an insurer that insists on a reasonable settlement. MCL 500.3148(1) provides that a claimant's attorney fee is charged to the insurer "if the court finds that the insurer unreasonably refused to pay the claim or unreasonably delayed in making proper payment." Under the majority's decision, an insurer has no reason to refuse any claim; thus, a claimant's attorney can use the threat of attorney fees to force an insurer into an unreasonable settlement. 28  Under the majority's decision, insurers will be encouraged to negotiate unreasonable  settlements and pass these off onto the MCCA. As stated, any liability that the MCCA must assume is eventually passed on to anyone in Michigan who must buy auto insurance.
Perhaps the majority can explain why the legislative method for containing costs for Michigan's no-fault insurance customers is an inferior purpose to their preferred policy objective. In particular, why is it an inferior purpose at a time when the Governor has requested an auto insurance rate freeze 29  and unemployment in Michigan has exceeded 14 percent? 30  
My point is not that our decision should be premised on keeping no-fault insurance affordable. Indeed, I maintain that such "'[p]olicy decisions are properly left for the people's elected representatives in the Legislature'" 31  and that the Legislature has made the policy decision in this case. Rather, I raise this issue because elections matter. The majority has seen fit to engage in its own policy-making while relying on erroneous assumptions. This is a lethal combination that will result in harmful, unintended consequences. While it may be  politically expedient to position oneself as "looking out for the little guy," 32   this case is an excellent example of how acting on such an altruistic impulse rather than applying the law results in a negative consequence for the vast majority of our citizens. In this context, each of us who must purchase this mandatory no-fault coverage is a "little guy." 33  
Second, the majority emphasizes that the MCCA may only adjust a member insurer's "practices and procedures." 34  The majority then immediately (and inconsistently but accurately) concedes that MCL 500.3104(7)(g) permits the MCCA to "adjust or assist in the adjustment of claims" and "[w]hen the MCCA asserts its power to adjust or assist in the adjustment of a claim, the MCCA effectively steps into the shoes of the  member insurer." 35  I previously agreed with these propositions. 36  Thus, I struggle to comprehend for what purpose the majority resists the simple proposition that the MCCA is statutorily authorized to adjust claims.
Third, "[p]laintiffs argue[d] that if the MCCA may reject member insurer claims on the basis of the reasonableness of the charges, member insurers will need to seek assurances that the MCCA will reimburse certain payments before making them, thus delaying payment." 37  The prospect of delayed payment seems to be a primary concern that drives the new majority's analysis. In support of its construction, it contends:
If this Court were to accept the MCCA's argument, the logical consequence would be that member insurers would be reluctant to settle with the claimant. Member insurers might then force a jury trial with every catastrophically injured claimant in order to secure a verdict with a "reasonable" stamp on the result. 38 
The majority employs this policy-based rationale to depart from its own definitions of "coverages" because otherwise "[t]his outcome goes against the legislative purpose of assuring efficient and quick recovery for claimants in the no-fault system." 39  The majority fails to explain, however, how its alternative construction actually resolves the issue. In fact, it does not.
The majority concedes that the MCCA has authority to "requir[e] submission of proposed settlement agreements  for approval." 40  This is the very outcome that  the plaintiff insurance companies here sought to avoid. Indeed, I believe that "requiring submission of proposed settlement agreements" or "seeking assurances that the MCCA will reimburse certain payments" would have been a natural consequence of USF&G I, because it actually gave meaning to the plain language of this statute. The MCCA is likely to act on the majority's advice (indeed, it should) and mandate that member insurers afford it the opportunity to object to proposed settlements or other agreements before they become binding. Ironically, it appears that even the majority does not deny that the MCCA has this statutory power.
Thus, the issue of delay is not resolved by the majority's opinion. Moreover, the majority's opinion does not address circumstances, like the present cases, where the MCCA was not afforded an opportunity to reject the agreements, which likely explains the $ 693.8 million bill that will be passed onto and shared by every Michigan automobile owner because of the increased and uncontrolled liability that the new majority's opinion will create for the MCCA.
We, as jurists, are ill-prepared to make complicated policy-based judgments unrelated to the policy choices that the Legislature has enacted. We do the least damage when we merely follow the Legislature's lead by giving words of a statute a plain reading and enforcing  the statute as written. "The Legislature, unlike the judiciary, is institutionally equipped to assess the numerous trade-offs associated with a particular policy choice." 41  The Legislature has made difficult choices, and it used particular words with particular meanings to convey those choices. Our prior opinion respected our role as jurists, and the Legislature's role as policy-maker, by interpreting the relevant statutory language in a manner consistent with the plain meaning of the words chosen by the Legislature. In an effort to avoid the meaning of the words chosen by the Legislature, the new majority has engaged in a wandering, policy-based analysis that is as flawed as it is misguided. It is an expensive mistake for which every policyholder in Michigan will pay.
Undeterred and aiming to quell the likely negative response to its policy-based decision, the new majority asserts that my concerns "appear[] highly speculative and, indeed, unfounded." 42  My concerns will cease to be "highly speculative" and "unfounded" when they are reflected in the MCCA's annual assessments. Michigan drivers will soon receive their no-fault insurance bills (I have received mine) with the updated higher MCCA assessment for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2009. At that point, Michigan drivers will be free to determine for themselves whether my concerns are sound and based in reality.
Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Maura D. Corrigan
  APPENDIX
STATE OF MICHIGAN
IN THE SUPREME COURT
UNITED STATES FIDELITY INSURANCE & GUARANTY COMPANY, a foreign corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
MICHIGAN CATASTROPHIC CLAIMS ASSOCIATION, a non-profit Catastrophic Claims Association, Defendant-Appellant.
Case No. 133466
Court of Appeals Case No. 260604
Oakland Circuit Court No. 03-051485-CK
 AFFIDAVIT OF GLORIA FREELAND IN SUPPORT OF APPELLANT'S SUPPLEMENT TO ITS ANSWER TO APPELLEE'S MOTION FOR REHEARING
I, Gloria Freeland, being first duly sworn, depose and swear:
1. I am the Executive Director of the Michigan Catastrophic Claims Association (the "MCCA"). I have held this position since 2007 and have been employed by the MCCA since 1991.
2. I have personal knowledge of the facts in the Affidavit, and if called upon to testify, I can do so competently.
3. Each year the MCCA's consulting actuaries estimate the loss and loss adjustment reserve expenses of the MCCA.
4. This year, as a direct result of the Michigan Supreme Court's March 27, 2009 order granting the appellees' motion for rehearing, the MCCA's actuaries recommended, and the Board of Directors accepted their recommendation, that the MCCA increase by 10% the estimated $ 645 million needed to pay claims expected to he incurred for the fiscal accident year beginning July 1, 2009. This represents an increase of $ 64.5 million.
  5. Further, the actuaries recommended, and the Board of Directors accepted their recommendation, that the MCCA increase its needed reserves as of December 31, 2008 by 5% or $ 629.3 million as a direct result of the signal sent by the Michigan Supreme Court in granting appellees motion for rehearing.
6. Increasing by $ 64.5 million the amount needed to pay claims expected to be incurred for the fiscal accident year beginning July 1, 2009, and increasing the MCCA's needed reserves by $ 629.3 million, are largely responsible for the increase of more than 19% in this year's assessment.
/s/ Gloria Freeland
Gloria Freeland
Dated: April 8, 2009
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 8th day of April, 2009
/s/ Karen M. Nick
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
 MARKMAN, J. (dissenting).
I concur fully with the discussion in part IV of Justice Young's dissenting opinion and therefore also dissent.
Stephen J. Markman

 

