, Jr.  
Dissent




YOUNG, J. (dissenting).
I dissent from the order granting plaintiffs' motion for reconsideration in this case. Since the 19th century, "this Court has adhered to the principle that a motion for rehearing or reconsideration should be denied unless a party has raised an issue of fact or law that was not previously considered but which may affect the outcome." 1  We codified this judicial practice in MCR 2.119(F)(3):
Generally, and without restricting the discretion of the court, a motion for rehearing or reconsideration which merely presents the same issues ruled on by the court, either expressly or by reasonable implication, will not be granted. The moving party must demonstrate a palpable error by which the court and the parties have been misled and show that a different disposition of the motion must result from correction of the error.
In this case, plaintiffs have not raised any new issues that may properly be considered by this Court. Just as in their original application for leave to appeal, plaintiffs contend that MCL 600.5821(4), which exempts the state and its political subdivisions from the effect of statutes of limitations when seeking recovery of certain costs, precludes the application of the no-fault act's one-year-back rule, MCL 500.3145(1). Accordingly, plaintiffs continue to ask this Court to hold that Cameron v Auto Club Ins Ass'n 2  was wrongly decided and to overrule Liptow v State Farm Mut Automobile Ins Co. 3  
The only new issue raised by plaintiffs in their motion for reconsideration is a policy-based argument regarding the economic effect of the Court's order given the state's current fiscal crisis. However, this Court is neither constitutionally permitted nor institutionally equipped to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of statutes enacted by elected legislators in the democratic political process. 4  Were we to do so, we would cross the line into the legislative sphere in violation of the separation of powers. 5  
The concurring statement of Justice Weaver mischaracterizes the error analysis of MCR 2.119(F)(3). Under this rule, the Court may grant rehearing or reconsideration only when there is "'a palpable error by which the court and the parties have been misled.'" 6  Plaintiffs have not raised any new legal arguments in their motion for reconsideration. Rather, plaintiffs focus solely on the economic effect of the statutes, a policy-based argument that cannot amount to palpable error. Plaintiffs have cited nothing more than their disagreement with prior courts' application of the plain language of the relevant statutes, plain language which could not mislead either the parties or this Court.
There is one significant change since our November 26, 2008, denial of leave: the composition of this Court. Justice Hathaway unseated former Chief Justice Taylor in the 2008 election and took office on January 1, 2009, thereby shifting the philosophical balance on the Court. There is no palpable error, but there is a new philosophical majority.
Over a century ago, the justices of this Court wisely realized that such a change is not a proper ground for reconsideration. 7  By circumventing this principle, the new philosophical majority has sub silentio overruled that long venerated precedent. In the short time since the composition of this Court changed, those in the majority have exhibited a lack of judicial restraint in acting upon prior orders and opinions of this Court with which they disagree. They have taken this tack despite their prior professed beliefs that the composition of the Court should not control its decisions. 8  Indeed, then-Justice Kelly, and Justices Cavanagh and Weaver all dissented from this Court's prior order denying leave to appeal in this case. 9  Thus, this Court's order granting reconsideration is nothing more than the new majority seizing upon this motion to vindicate some of its members' dissents. The "judicial restraint" and principles lauded previously by members of the new majority should not depend on the composition of the Court.
I respectfully dissent.
CORRIGAN, J., joins the statement of YOUNG, J.

 

