ing).
Today this Court denies rehearing in this case notwithstanding the fact that, in construing MCL 600.5851(1), the majority opinion repeatedly and expressly substitutes its preferred language for that chosen by the Legislature. In denying rehearing the Court also reaffirms the erroneous interpretation the majority gave to MCL 600.5821(4) in its original opinion in this case. I dissent from the decision to deny rehearing because I would correct the original opinion so that it relies on the actual statutory language, and then interpret those words as clearly intended by the Legislature and as this Court had already done in Cameron v Auto Club Ins Ass'n. 7  
Demonstrating the characteristic overreach exhibited by the majority last term and the resultant overbreadth of its opinions, 8  the majority used this case as a handpicked vehicle to overrule Cameron v Auto Club Ins Ass'n. In Cameron, this Court had recently held that the minority and insanity tolling provision of MCL 600.5851(1), which only addresses when a person may "bring [an] action," does not prevent the application of the Revised Judicature Act's one-year-back rule because that rule is a damages-limiting provision and not a statute of limitations. 9  Curiously, the majority reached this issue in this case even though the facts here involve neither a person who was mentally insane nor a person under the age of 18. Indeed, in a rare moment of agreement between adversaries before this Court, both plaintiff and defendant stated that the Court need not reach the Cameron issue in order to provide a favorable result to either party in this case. Undeterred, the majority nonetheless overruled Cameron, erasing the statutory distinction between statutes of limitations and damage-limiting provisions as they relate to the statutory savings provision. The majority held that the savings provision "grant[s] infants and incompetent persons one year after their disability is removed" the ability to bring an action to recover personal protection benefits. 10  
Apart from the errors of statutory interpretation in coming to this result, the majority's decision is patently erroneous because MCL 600.5851(1) reaches only the mentally insane, not the mentally incompetent, as the majority's opinion contrarily and repeatedly states. 11  The two terms have distinct meanings, particularly when employed in the legal sense. "Insane" is defined by statute: "The term insane as employed in this chapter means a condition  of mental derangement such as to prevent the sufferer from comprehending rights he or she is otherwise bound to know . . . ." 12  Distinctly, "incompetent" is defined as "Chiefly of a person: of inadequate ability or fitness; lacking the requisite capacity or qualification; incapable." 13  Thus, "insanity" denotes a severe involuntary medical condition that removes any ability for an afflicted person to know his rights, while "incompetent" merely indicates a person who is not competent or unqualified in a certain regard. Therefore, those who are mentally insane will necessarily also be incompetent, but those who are incompetent need not necessarily be insane. And this is the chief problem with the majority opinion's repeated use of a nonstatutory term: by using "incompetent" where the statute employs "insane," the opinion unnecessarily creates obvious disharmony between the words of the statute and the controlling caselaw of this Court interpreting those words. Such disharmony will almost certainly cause confusion in future cases regarding the applicability of the one-year-back rule to the incompetent.
And so, in this case, on an issue of the majority's own creation--an issue not even related to the case at hand--the majority has inexplicably attempted to rewrite MCL 600.5851(1) by broadening the class of individuals covered from those who are insane to those who are merely incompetent. There is perhaps no clearer example than this case of this majority's demonstrated indifference to the actual words of a statute and the legislative process that considers, debates, compromises, and ultimately selects those words. 14  Neither the author of the majority's opinion nor the justices who today sanction that opinion by denying rehearing deign to explain why it is appropriate for this Court to substitute a new protected category of persons for the one the Legislature actually chose. Once again in Michigan, judicial preferences trump legislative ones.
Unfortunately, the majority's legal errors do not end there. By overruling Cameron, the majority generally eliminated the statutory distinction between statutes of limitations and clauses limiting damages, and then applied this new rationale to its interpretation of MCL 600.5821(4)--the savings provision affecting political entities relevant to this case. This decision is clearly erroneous, as Justice MARKMAN noted in his vigorous dissent to the original opinion:
While the RJA, specifically MCL 600.5821(4), states that an action by the state or one of its political subdivisions "may be brought at any time without limitation," the no-fault act, specifically MCL 500.3145(1), states that the claimant "may not recover benefits for any portion of the loss incurred more than 1 year before the date on which the action was commenced." (Emphasis added.) Having the right to bring a cause of action is not the equivalent of having the right to recover an unlimited amount of damages. Therefore, when these two provisions are read together, it is clear that while a political subdivision may  bring an action at any time, it cannot recover benefits for any portion of the loss incurred more than 1 year before the date on which the action was commenced. In other words, MCL 600.5821(4), which pertains only to when an action may be commenced, does not preclude the application of the one-year-back rule, which only limits how much can be recovered after the action has been commenced. 15 
Yet, in interpreting this statute and applying it in light of a recently decided precedent by this Court, the majority holds otherwise and overrules that precedent.
In addition to the majority's interpretive errors, the enormous uncertainty created by rulings such as this should shock the members of the public and our Legislature. By overruling Cameron and erasing the statutory distinction between statutes of limitations and clauses limiting damages, the majority works to undo what has been called the grand "compromise" of Michigan's no fault insurance regime. In summary, Michigan is the only jurisdiction in the nation with a no-fault automobile insurance system with mandatory unlimited lifetime medical benefits; in exchange, the Legislature imposed restrictions and regulations to protect the system's long-term viability. This Court's decision in Cameron, and decisions by the Court of Appeals such as Liptow 16  and the opinion below in this case 17  that correctly applied Cameron's accurate interpretation of the statutory terms, enforce the statutory "compromise" by allowing certain entities to bring an action after the statute of limitations has run while limiting the damages they can recover. The one-year-back limitation on damages is a mechanism that safeguards the fiscal integrity of the system while maintaining reasonable rates for consumers.
 Ultimately, while this decision may be good for a few, it will hurt most Michigan citizens who must purchase automobile insurance. The practical effect of this decision is that persons who wish to have their claims reimbursed can wait decades before filing such claims--long after it is possible to challenge the validity of these stale claims due to the loss of witnesses, documents, and other evidence related to a claim. Indeed, plaintiff here waited over six years to seek reimbursement of its claim. The public should not be mistaken as to who will pay for the increased costs that this decision will cause. By its nature, insurance is designed to spread risks and costs over a broad population, and actuaries know how to calculate such risks and account for them when setting premiums. Thus, the increased costs that this decision creates will eventually find their way into every driver's premiums. When this happens, Michigan citizens will know who is responsible for this "judicial gift" of higher automobile insurance premiums.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent from this Court's decision to deny rehearing in this case.
MARKMAN, J. (dissenting).
I would grant defendant's motion for rehearing, and then vacate this Court's  July 31, 2010 decision and affirm the Court of Appeals for the reasons set forth in Justice CORRIGAN's and Justice YOUNG'S dissenting statements, as well as for the reasons set forth in my dissenting opinion in the underlying case. Univ of Mich Regents v Titan Ins Co, 487 Mich 289, 330-348, 791 N.W.2d 897, 2010 Mich. LEXIS 1658 (2010).
DAVIS, J., not participating. I recuse myself and am not participating because I was on the Court of Appeals panel in this case. See MCR 2.003(B).

 

