; Stephen J. Markman  
Concur




 YOUNG, J. (concurring). I concur in Justice Markman's opinion. I write separately to note that stability in the law contributes to stability in our society. This is the  essence of the rule of law--that controversies are decided on the basis of law, not the identity of the disputing parties. This is why the symbol of justice is blindfolded, because she is uninterested in the identity of the parties but concerned only with the legal merit of their cause. This is also what distinguishes the justice systems of great democracies from those of nations where who one is matters more than the law.
In the grand scheme of things, it might be hard to understand why this great principle matters. But whenever one buys property or enters into a contractual relationship, one does so with the expectation that the rules of law that govern now will not be summarily changed in the future. So, in commercial matters, no less than in other spheres of life, it is important to know in advance what rules will govern in the future and this is especially true of contracts.
When judges desire to assert the power to control the outcomes of controversies--to ensure that favored parties such as the "little guy" win whatever the law--commitment to fixed rules of law becomes an obstacle and thus an inconvenience that must be the first thing cast aside in aid of such power. In the place of announced rules of law are substituted myriad judicial dodges that allow a judge to manipulate outcomes after the fact. Thus, in contractual matters, the willful judge must negate fixed rules of contract in favor of ones that permit after-the-fact "adjustments." These dodges are usually announced as serving a principle of "equity" but are usually no more than a mask that hides the judicial desire to alter outcomes for favored parties.
However well intentioned, I believe that this Court is moving away from defending the rule of law (applying rules known in advance to existing controversies) to a system in which a party's status is what becomes important to litigation outcomes. For all the reasons stated in Justice Markman's partial concurrence, this case represents a small but significant step in that direction.
Robert P. Young, Jr.
Maura D. Corrigan
Stephen J. Markman
MARKMAN, J. (concurring). In this straightforward contract case, one that ought to be the subject of consensus on this Court, the majority needlessly introduces uncertainty and doubt into the law of our state. By its gratuitous observation that the parties to the contract here are "business entities with equal bargaining power," ante at 5, the majority suggests that this circumstance is somehow relevant to its conclusion that the contract ought to be read in accordance with its language. Neither of the parties to this contract has raised any argument concerning their respective "bargaining powers."
After a decade in which this Court has sought to bring a greater consistency and certainty to the law of this state by a disciplined interpretation of statutes, ordinances, deeds, and contracts, and by clear judicial statements concerning the rights and obligations of individuals and businesses, the majority seems bent on restoring a legal regime in which the stability and predictability of the law is perpetually subject to creative legal arguments.
The majority offers no explanation of why it is necessary to remark upon the allegedly "equal bargaining power" of the parties in this case. What, for example, would be different in the majority's analysis  if one of the parties to this dispute had not been a "business entity"? What would be different in this  analysis if the parties had not been of "equal bargaining power"? Indeed, what does it mean to be of "equal bargaining power," and how do we calculate such "equality"? Where does such a requirement of "equality" derive from in the law of this state? Through what means can a party with "unequal" bargaining power ensure that its contract is binding on another party?
While the majority provides no guidance in answering these questions, one can hardly doubt that it will become an increasingly common aspect of the appellate landscape in contract cases in Michigan for one party-- generally the party that finds the language of the contract to be inhospitable to its claims-- to offer its own answers. And as things tend to go, appellate courts will increasingly come to articulate vague rules, fraught with exceptions and exceptions to exceptions, "totality of circumstances" analyses, and multi-part tests for ascertaining what constitutes "equal bargaining power." And eventually in place of a rule of law in which the words of contracts are taken seriously, and in which parties to contract disputes can understand their rights and responsibilities, and in which parties may even find it possible to understand these rights and responsibilities without having to avail themselves of a lawyer, the majority will leave in its wake a legacy of more litigation, more appeals, higher legal costs, and a diminished role for private parties, with a concomitantly enhanced role for judges, in resolving contract disputes. But I suppose this is the very point. When our new Chief Justice promises to "undo . . . the damage" she asserts has been done by this Court over the past decade, Detroit Free Press, December 10, 2008, at 2A, I would venture that the respect this Court has accorded during this time to competent persons to enter into contracts of their own choosing constitutes one aspect of such "damage." See also, e.g., Genesee Foods Services, Inc v Meadowbrook, Inc., 483 Mich 907, 762 N.W.2d 165, 2009 Mich. LEXIS 459 (2009), order of the Supreme Court, entered March 20, 2009 (Docket No. 137526).
 It is well established in Michigan that "'competent persons shall have the utmost liberty of contracting and that their agreements voluntarily and fairly made shall be held valid and enforced in the courts.'" Terrien v Zwit, 467 Mich 56, 71; 648 NW2d 602 (2002), quoting Twin City Pipe Line Co v Harding Glass Co, 283 U.S. 353, 357; 51 S Ct 476; 75 L Ed 1112(1931); see also Port Huron Ed Ass'n v Port Huron Area School Dist, 452 Mich 309, 319; 550 NW2d 228 (1996) (discussing the "'fundamental policy of freedom of contract'" under which
'"parties are generally free to agree to whatever specific rules they like'"). Rather than merely reiterating this law and resolving the instant controversy, the majority introduces a new murkiness into a realm of law in which clarity and certainty are essential to everyday business relationships. While the present controversy may not seem of great consequence beyond the parties, it is entirely typical of thousands of such contracts freely entered into by individuals and businesses throughout this state each day. And it is essential to the rule of law that these contracts be respected and that this Court provide the leadership and direction to ensure that this takes place. Today's decision moves in exactly the wrong direction in that regard.
The majority reaches the correct result and applies the correct analysis. It is simply not content to end its opinion where it ought, choosing instead to invite new litigation by eroding clear-cut principles of  contract law. 1  I would affirm, but without the majority's unsettling language concerning the "equal bargaining power" of the parties.
 Stephen J. Markman
Maura D. Corrigan
Robert P. Young, Jr.

 

