specially concurring).
I concur in the result but write separately to note that I would not reverse and remand based solely on the trial court's denial of Fisher's motion for continuance, which was requested midway through trial. Instead, I believe a new trial is necessary based on the other issues raised on appeal.
As stated in Judge Cortinas's opinion, during the afternoon of the first day of trial, defense counsel received a fax from Dr. Piper's office explaining that Dr. Piper was suffering a relapse from back surgery, was partially paralyzed, highly medicated, and unable to testify the next day. Dr. Piper was the defense's sole expert witness. Upon learning of Dr. Piper's sudden and unexpected unavailability, defense counsel immediately moved for a continuance and/or mistrial. Plaintiff's counsel vehemently objected, and argued that Dr. Piper's deposition testimony and addendum report were sufficient evidence of his expert opinion. The trial court denied the defense motions.
Prior to presenting Dr. Piper's deposition testimony to the jury, defense counsel sought permission from the trial court to inform the jury of Dr. Piper's illness and why he would not be testifying live. 2  The trial court denied defense counsel's request.
 Following the trial court's ruling, Dr. Piper's deposition testimony was read to the jury. After the testimony was read to the jury, defense counsel made an extensive  proffer regarding Dr. Piper's testimony if he had been able to testify at trial. 3 
 During rebuttal closing, counsel for Perez, Mr. Kleinberg, knowing that Dr. Piper was unavailable due to a sudden illness, and knowing that the defense had been prevented from making the jury aware of the reasons for Dr. Piper's unavailability, argued the following to the jury:
He [Perez] didn't complain fast enough. And he's going to get up here and play nitty picky with a board certified orthopedic surgeon who says degenerative doesn't mean-he's reading from some little piece of paper he found on the damn Internet. It means this. I've got medical journals here. Where's Dr. Piper to come in and say any of that?
* * * *
I didn't try to hide anything. I brought in every single medical record. This man didn't get upset. I never - -
Simply put, Plaintiff's counsel intentionally misled the jury regarding the reason Dr. Piper did not present live testimony at trial. Defense counsel promptly and correctly objected and moved for a mistrial. The trial court sustained the objection without providing a curative instruction and denied the motion for mistrial. Given the highly inflammatory and prejudicial nature of the statement, the motion for a mistrial should have been granted. Taken together, these issues warrant reversal and a new trial.
We review the denial of a motion for new trial for abuse of discretion. See Salnave v. Pub. Health Trust of Dade County, 624 So. 2d 282 (Fla. 3d DCA 1993); Jones v. Airport Rent-A-Car, Inc., 342 So. 2d 104 (Fla. 3d DCA 1977). "If the issue has been properly preserved, the legal standard for trial courts to use in deciding motions for new trial based upon counsel's improper argument is whether the comment was highly prejudicial and inflammatory." Hagan v. Sun Bank of Mid-Florida, N.A., 666 So. 2d 580, 585 (Fla. 2d DCA 1996)(disapproved of on other grounds by Murphy v. Int'l Robotic Sys., Inc., 766 So. 2d 1010 (Fla. 2000)).
It is well settled that statements by counsel in closing argument which accuse  opposing counsel of hiding evidence and fraudulently preventing the presentation of relevant evidence constitute reversible error. See generally Wall v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 857 So. 2d 975 (Fla. 3d DCA 2003)(reversal required because of comments made by defense counsel regarding the plaintiff's failure to call her daughter to testify where defense counsel knew daughter was estranged from parents); Hernandez v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 695 So. 2d 484, 485-86 (Fla. 3d DCA 1997) (reversal required because trial court excluded testimony of plaintiff's expert that defendant had created an unsafe condition and defense counsel, after successfully arguing for the exclusion of the proffered evidence, in closing argument, "whipsawed the plaintiff for not producing that very testimony"); George v. Mann, 622 So. 2d 151, 152 (Fla. 3d DCA 1993)("Defense counsel repeatedly referred to Mrs. George's 'lawsuit pain,' and argued that she had 'set up' the entire lawsuit, implying that she was a liar and was perpetrating a fraud upon the court. Defense counsel also argued to the jury that Mrs. George had concealed evidence and violated discovery orders. This line of argument, even if not objected to, constitutes reversible error"); Emerson Elec. Co. v. Garcia, 623 So. 2d 523 (Fla. 3d DCA 1993)(new trial ordered where plaintiff's counsel accused defense counsel of fraud, hiding evidence, and putting up roadblocks to discovery).
I find that given Plaintiff's counsel's specific knowledge of the reason for Dr. Piper's absence, his opposition to informing the jury as to that reason, and his vehement argument to the trial court that Dr. Piper's deposition testimony and addendum report were sufficient evidence of his expert opinion, any argument by Plaintiff's counsel implying that defense counsel was hiding evidence by failing to bring in Dr. Piper to testify was both egregious and prejudicial to Fisher. See Johnnides v. Amoco Oil Co., 778 So. 2d 443 (Fla. 3d DCA 2001). Indeed, this Court has in the past characterized such an argument as "disingenuous" and "misleading" and has repeatedly disapproved of this type of approach to lawyering and litigation. See Hernandez, 695 So. 2d at 486.
Additionally, because this matter is being returned to the trial court for a new trial on all issues, I believe it appropriate to address the final issue raised by Fisher. A new trial is also warranted based on the trial court granting a directed verdict against the defendant, Fisher, on the issue of negligence. Perez's testimony differed substantially from Fisher's and therefore the issue of negligence should have been submitted to the jury.  At trial, Perez testified that when the accident occurred he was driving in the slow lane, in stop-and-go traffic. Perez's deposition testimony, which was also read at trial, contained a different version of the accident. In his deposition, Perez claimed that he was traveling at approximately 45 miles per hour; that prior to the impact he did not slow down or stop his vehicle; and that there were moving vehicles directly in front of him. Fisher, however, testified in her deposition that there was slight traffic on the road at the time of the accident and that Perez, although he did not slam on his brakes, came to a sudden complete stop in a moving lane. At trial, Fisher testified similarly although she also testified that she had seen Perez slowing down previous times, before the accident occurred.
In Florida, there is a presumption of negligence which attaches to the driver of a rear vehicle in a rear-end collision. Clampitt v. D.J. Spencer Sales, 786 So. 2d 570, 572-73 (Fla. 2001); Eppler v. Tarmac America, Inc., 752 So. 2d 592, 594 (Fla. 2000). "However, if the stop is not expected, i.e., 'abrupt and arbitrary' in a place  not reasonably expected . . . then the presumption is rebutted, and the [plaintiff] is not entitled to a directed verdict." See Hunter v. Ward, 812 So. 2d 601, 603 (Fla. 1st DCA 2002); accord, e.g., Wright v. Ring Power Corp., 834 So. 2d 329, 331 (Fla. 1st DCA 2003).
In this case, Fisher's testimony that Perez came to a sudden and complete stop, in a moving and immediately open lane of traffic, created a question of fact as to whether the stop was at a time and place reasonably to be expected. If the stop was not expected and was in a place not reasonably expected then the presumption of negligence was rebutted. Accordingly, Perez was not entitled to a directed verdict on the issue of negligence. The issue of negligence, dependent upon the conflicting testimony of the parties, should instead have been submitted to the jury. See Nathanson v. Houss, 717 So. 2d 114, 116 (Fla. 4th DCA 1998)("A directed verdict cannot stand where there is any competent evidence to support the non-movant's position."); cf. Cheng v. Sirichoke, 745 So. 2d 1152 (Fla. 3d DCA 1999)(conflicting testimony as to traffic conditions on busy urban expressway at time of collision precluded summary judgment in favor of preceding driver).   

 

