 in result only with an opinion.
Concur by: LAGOA  
Concur




LAGOA, J., concurring in result only.
I concur in denying Jackson's petition, but I reach this conclusion based on the text of article IV, section 7 of the Florida Constitution. Article IV, section 7 of the Constitution does not impose a temporal limitation on the executive's suspension power such that the constitutionally enumerated grounds resulting in suspension must occur during the suspended officer's current term of office.
Article IV, section 7(a) of the Florida Constitution provides: After the Governor executes the order of suspension, the Florida Senate "may, in proceedings prescribed by law, remove from office or reinstate the suspended official." Art. IV, § 7(b), Fla. Const. Where the language of the Constitution "is clear, unambiguous, and addresses the matter in issue, then it must be enforced as written," as the "constitutional language must be allowed to 'speak for itself.'" Fla. Soc'y of Ophthalmology v. Fla. Optometric Ass'n, 489 So. 2d 1118, 1119 (Fla. 1986).
By executive order stating the grounds and filed with the custodian of state records, the governor may suspend from office any state officer not subject to impeachment, any officer of the militia not in the active service of the United  States, or any county officer, for malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty, drunkenness, incompetence, permanent inability to perform official duties, or commission of a felony, and may fill the office by appointment for the period of suspension. The suspended officer may at any time before removal be reinstated by the governor.
Article IV, section 7 of the Constitution provides a full and complete method for the suspension and removal of certain categories of officers. Article IV, section 7(a) expressly and unambiguously vests the Governor with the power to suspend. The only constitutional requirements imposed on the Governor are that (1) the officer be a member of one of the three identified categories (a state officer not subject to impeachment, an officer of the militia not in the active service of the United States, or a county officer), (2) the suspension be for one of the constitutionally enumerated grounds (malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty, drunkenness, incompetence, permanent inability to perform official duties, or commission of a felony), and (3) the Governor file an executive order of suspension stating those grounds with the "custodian of state records," i.e., the Secretary of State. Article IV, section 7(b) expressly and unambiguously vests the Senate with the power to remove or reinstate the officer through "proceedings prescribed by law."
As previously noted by this Court, the Governor's suspension power is "executive" and "so long as the Governor acts within his jurisdiction as charged by organic law, [i.e., the Constitution,] his action may not be reviewed by the courts." State ex rel. Hardie v. Coleman, 115 Fla. 119, 155 So. 129, 133 (Fla. 1933). Similarly, the Senate's judgment of removal or reinstatement "is final, and will not be reviewed by the courts," as under the constitutional process for suspension and removal, the "Senate is nothing less than a court provided to examine into and determine whether or not the Governor exercises the power of suspension in keeping with the constitutional mandate." Id. at 134. Assuming that the suspended officer falls into one of the constitutionally enumerated categories and that the Governor has filed the executive order of suspension with the custodian of records, the plain language of the Constitution excludes the judiciary from involving itself in the suspension and removal process save for a limited exception.
Turning to that exception, the Constitution requires the Governor to issue an executive order of suspension "stating the grounds" of suspension. While a suspended officer may ask the courts to examine an executive order of suspension to ensure that the order satisfies that constitutional requirement, the judiciary's role is limited to determining whether the executive order, on its face, sets forth allegations of fact relating to one of the constitutionally enumerated grounds of suspension. Id. at 133. Therefore, "[a] mere arbitrary or blank order of suspension without supporting allegations of fact, even though it named one or more of the constitutional grounds of suspension, would not meet the requirements of the Constitution," id., but where the executive order of suspension contains factual allegations relating to an  enumerated ground for suspension, the Constitution prohibits the courts from examining or determining the sufficiency of the evidence supporting those facts, as the "matter of reviewing the charges and the evidence to support them is solely in the discretion of the Senate," id. at 134; see also State ex rel. Kelly v. Sullivan, 52 So. 2d 422, 425 (1951) ("It is the function of the Senate, and never that of the Courts, to review the evidence upon which the Governor suspends an officer in the event the Governor recommends his removal from office.").1  As a result, the factual allegations in an executive order of suspension must pass only a low threshold to satisfy the judiciary's limited, facial review, and "if, on the whole, [the executive order] contains allegations that bear some reasonable relation to the charge made against the officer, it will be adjudged as sufficient." Hardie, 155 So. at 133.
Under this standard, Executive Order 19-13 satisfies the requirements of article IV, section 7(a). Reviewing the four corners of the Executive Order, the Governor suspended Jackson, a county officer, on the constitutionally enumerated grounds of "neglect of duty" and "incompetence." The Executive Order supports those two grounds with various factual allegations against Jackson that, on their face, reasonably relate to the charges of neglect of duty and incompetence made against Jackson. Whether there is any merit to the grounds listed in Executive Order 19-13 for Jackson's suspension from office is a determination to be made exclusively by the Florida Senate under the Constitution.
Ordinarily, this would end the judicial inquiry. Jackson, however, contends that article IV, section 7(a) limits the Governor's suspension power to acts occurring during the officer's current term of office.
In considering Jackson's argument, the analysis again begins with the text of the Constitution, for it is the constitutional language that delineates the executive power to suspend. As discussed above, article IV, section 7(a) of the Constitution imposes only three requirements on the Governor's exercise of the suspension power: (1) the officer suspended must fall into one of the constitutionally enumerated categories; (2) the suspension must be based on one of the constitutionally enumerated grounds for suspension; and (3) the Governor must file an executive order of suspension stating those grounds with the custodian of state records. Significantly, article IV, section 7(a) does not state that the enumerated grounds resulting in suspension must occur within the officer's current term.
In support of her position that article IV, section 7(a) limits the Governor's suspension power to acts that occur within the suspended officer's current term, Jackson relies on this Court's advisory opinion to Governor Gilchrist in In re Advisory Opinion to Governor, 64 Fla. 168, 60 So. 337 (Fla. 1912) ("1912 Advisory Opinion").2  In the  1912 Advisory Opinion, this Court provided Governor Gilchrist with an advisory opinion that article IV, section 15 of the 1885 Florida Constitution (the predecessor to article IV, section 7 of the 1968 Florida Constitution) did not authorize the Governor to suspend a county officer for an act of malfeasance or misfeasance committed by him prior to the date of the beginning of his current term in office. Relying on an earlier advisory opinion, In re Advisory Opinion to the Governor, 31 Fla. 1, 12 So. 114 (Fla. 1893) ("1893 Advisory Opinion"), the 1912 Advisory Opinion noted that the "power . . . given the Governor to suspend the incumbent of an office and to fill the office by appointment is necessarily confined to the current term of the office." 60 So. at 337. From the 1893 Advisory Opinion's conclusion that an appointment is limited to the remainder of the suspended official's term, the 1912 Advisory Opinion concluded that "the Constitution contemplates that the causes for suspension from office shall arise from the conduct of the officer during the term for which the officer is then in commission." 60 So. at 337-38.
This statement, however, does not follow from a natural reading of the constitutional text, as neither article IV, section 7(a) of the Constitution nor its predecessor (article IV, section 15 of the 1885 Constitution) states that only acts occurring within the officer's current term can form the basis for a suspension. As there is nothing in the constitutional text relating to any temporal limitation on the Governor's power to suspend, it is impossible to say that the Constitution "contemplates" an additional requirement on the exercise of this constitutionally authorized executive power.
While a gubernatorial appointment following a suspension lasts only for the remainder of the suspended officer's current term of office, it does not follow that there is a constitutionally mandated correlation between the duration of an officer's suspension and the dates on which the acts giving rise to suspension occurred. Indeed, it is not hard to imagine situations where an officer's misconduct in a prior term implicates his or her fitness to serve the remainder of his or her current term. For example, an officer could have committed a felony or engaged in malfeasance during a  prior term of office that went undetected until after reelection to the current term. It is not necessary to indulge in a series of hypotheticals to try to parse which ones may or may not be subject to the exercise of the suspension power, however, because nothing in the plain language of article IV, section 7(a) prohibits the Governor from suspending an officer based on an enumerated act that occurred prior to the officer's current term. The Constitution then places the responsibility on the Senate to determine whether removal or reinstatement is warranted based on those facts and the evidence presented at proceedings before that body.
Because the 1912 Advisory Opinion is premised on unsound legal principles with no support in the plain and unambiguous language of article IV, section 7(a) of the Constitution, I would disapprove its statement that "the Constitution contemplates that the causes for suspension from office shall arise from the conduct of the officer during the term for which the officer is then in commission."
The Constitution establishes a clear and unambiguous process for suspension and removal. The Governor may suspend for one or more of the grounds enumerated in article IV, section 7(a), and the Senate may remove or reinstate the officer pursuant to article IV, section 7(b). The Constitution reserves to the Senate the sole responsibility for reviewing the evidence supporting the Governor's executive order of suspension, and it is the constitutional role of the Senate to consider whether the suspended officer merits removal or reinstatement. Assuming the suspended officer falls within one of the constitutionally enumerated categories and the Governor has filed the executive order of suspension with the state custodian of records, the judiciary's sole role in this process involves a facial review of the executive order of suspension to determine whether it is merely a blank order of suspension without supporting allegations of fact or whether it contains allegations that bear some reasonable relation to the charge made against the officer. This is "due entirely to the fact that the Constitution itself has set up its own special court to try the matter, namely the state Senate." Hardie, 155 So. at 136 (Davis, C.J., concurring). Nothing in the constitutional text limits the executive suspension power to acts occurring within the suspended officer's current term, and by imposing an additional requirement on the executive suspension power not found in the text, the 1912 Advisory Opinion improperly inserted the courts into a process that the Constitution leaves to the Governor and the Senate.
For the reasons stated, I concur in denying Jackson's petition for writ of quo warranto.

 

