 in part; dissenting in part).
Alexander J. Michaels ("Michaels"), an attorney, was found in direct criminal contempt  by the trial court, and sentenced to two days incarceration. For the following reasons, I respectfully dissent as I would grant the petition and vacate the judgment and sentence in its entirety.
I. FACTUAL HISTORY
The direct criminal contempt charges stem from alleged conduct that occurred on the final day of a three-day probation violation hearing. Michaels represented the probationer. Because of Michaels's behavior throughout the hearing, the trial court admonished him on several occasions to proceed in a respectful manner toward the trial court, witnesses, and attorneys.
On the last day of the hearing, May 17, 2013, Michaels was conducting the re-direct examination of a witness, when the Assistant State Attorney, Michael Von Zamft ("Von Zamft"), objected, and the following exchange occurred:
MR. MICHAELS: There was a phone call from -- was there.
MR. VON ZAMFT: Objection, Your Honor. This is also outside the scope of cross.
MR. MICHAELS: Let's talk about the gap between 3:15 and 4:33. There is no gap. There's a communication. Can I finish?
THE COURT: Go ahead. There is a gap.
MR. VON ZAMFT: Your Honor, he threatens me one more time, I'm going to deal with him in a different way. I'm going to ask the Court to hold this man in contempt and potentially baker act him. I have case law to substantiate your right to substantiate the contempt.
THE COURT: I have the case law. I just want to address to [sic] things before I address the issue.
MR. MICHAELS: You are talking to me. I asked him not to interrupt. He continue [sic] to interrupt. I raised my voice at him to be quiet.
THE COURT: That's not the conduct I'm referring to. The raising of the voice I tolerated. It was the hand gesture and what was mouthed.
MR. MICHAELS: Nothing was mouth.
(Emphasis added)
After the above exchange, further discussion occurred and the trial court stated that it was going to conduct a hearing to show cause for direct criminal contempt for the "actions I've described to you making rude and violent gestures toward the prosecutor and mouthing the words 'f**k you' to the prosecutor in my presence . . . which I saw."
After a brief recess, the trial court conducted a hearing on the direct criminal contempt charge. During the contempt hearing, Michaels was represented by counsel. Nine witnesses testified, including the two assistant state attorneys (Von Zamft and Stephen Mitchell) and Michaels.4 
All of the witnesses testified that Michaels was standing at the podium examining a witness when Von Zamft made an objection. In response to the objection, Michaels raised his voice and said words to the effect of "let me finish." While making that statement, Michaels extended his right arm with his palm facing outward and in the direction of Von Zamft. Immediately thereafter, Von Zamft, angry and red-faced, stood from the prosecution table, walked to the prosecution's podium, made a fist which he shook at the direction of Michaels and asked the trial court to  find Michaels in contempt "and potentially baker act him."
Significantly, every witness, including Von Zamft, testified that they did not hear Michaels say the obscenity referred to by the trial court, i.e., "f**k you" or see him mouth any words. They also uniformly testified that Michaels did not make an inappropriate, violent or physical hand gesture.
Michaels, however, testified that he did mouth offensive words, but he did so in Romanian, because "I learn over the years, not in court to use the English word f**k you."5 
At the conclusion of the contempt hearing, the trial court found Michaels in direct criminal contempt of court, and sentenced him to two days in jail. On that same day, the trial court entered a written judgment of contempt ("Order 1"), finding direct criminal contempt:
IT APPEARING TO THIS COURT that you have been found guilty of DIRECT CRIMINAL CONTEMPT OF COURT for FOUL LANGUAGE AND DISRESPECT TO THE COURT, inappropriate violent gestures, all of which obstructed the proceedings and administration of Justice. Including mumbling "F**k you" at the podium. It is therefore ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that you are and stand convicted of Contempt of Court.
The trial court proceeded to enter a second order ("Order 2"), stating:
[T]hat Alexander Michaels was in violation of a direct court order to conduct himself in a respectful and professional manner, that he violated that order by using foul language, To Wit: "F**k You" and or the equivalent term in Romanian, as well as using violent and offensive physical gestures in an effort to obstruct the proceedings and the administration of Justice before this court and did in fact disrupt this Court. All conduct occurred in the presence of this court.
ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that Alexander Michaels is to stand conviction [sic] of Contempt of Court and is sentences [sic] to two days in the Dade County Jail.
(emphasis added).
On Friday, May 17, 2013, at 4:50 p.m., the trial court concluded the contempt hearing and ordered Michaels taken into custody to immediately begin serving the  two-day sentence. Counsel for Michaels asked the trial court for a stay in order to appeal the trial court's finding of direct criminal contempt, which the trial court summarily denied. Counsel for Michaels also requested an appellate bond, which the trial court also summarily refused. An emergency petition for writ of habeas corpus was filed with this Court, and this Court stayed the trial court's sentence pending further review of the emergency petition.
II. ANALYSIS
Criminal contempt is defined as "any act which is calculated to embarrass, hinder, or obstruct the court in the administration of justice, or which is calculated to lessen its authority or its dignity." Ex parte Crews, 127 Fla. 381, 173 So. 275, 279 (Fla. 1937). Criminal contempt requires some willful act or omission calculated to hinder the orderly functions of the court. See Davila v. State, 100 So. 3d 262, 264 (Fla. 3d DCA 2012); Thompson v. State, 618 So. 2d 781, 784 (Fla. 5th DCA 1993); Sewell v. State, 443 So. 2d 164, 165 (Fla. 1st DCA 1983). The main purpose of the law of contempt is to "appropriately punish for an assault or an aspersion upon the authority and dignity of the court or judge." Ex parte Earman, 85 Fla. 297, 95 So. 755, 760-61 (Fla. 1923). "[T]he punishment must be appropriate to the offense and not excessive." Id. at 760. The power to punish for criminal contempt must be exercised cautiously and sparingly. Carroll v. State, 327 So. 2d 881 (Fla. 3d DCA 1976).
"The standard to be applied in determining whether conduct is contemptuous is an objective one based upon a determination of the conduct's tendency to hinder the administration of justice, rather than a subjective one concerned with the sensitivities of a particular judge. Importantly, as noted [by the Florida Supreme Court in Ex parte Crews] above, the conduct alleged to be contemptuous must be calculated to cause harm." Murrell v. State, 595 So. 2d 1049, 1050 (Fla. 4th DCA 1992) (emphasis in original). See also Ex parte Earman, 95 So. at 762-63 (objective standard means that judge's subjective perception of conduct will not satisfy requirement for holding an individual in direct criminal contempt). Moreover, where a judgment of contempt is not objectively supported by the court transcripts, it is procedurally defective. See Krueger v. State, 351 So. 2d 47 (Fla. 3d DCA 1977). Direct criminal contempt must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. McRoy v. State, 31 So. 3d 273, 274 (Fla. 5th DCA 2010); Braisted v. State, 614 So. 2d 639, 640 (Fla. 4th DCA 1993).
Florida Rule of Criminal Procedure 3.830 gives the trial court the authority to punish a criminal contempt "summarily if the court saw or heard the conduct constituting the contempt committed in the actual presence of the court." Fla. R. Crim. P. 3.830; accord Gidden v. State, 613 So. 2d 457, 460 (Fla. 1993) ("Direct criminal contempt results from conduct committed in the actual presence of a judge and, consequently, may be punished summarily by the judge who saw or heard the conduct constituting the contempt.").
Rule 3.830, however, requires that a judgment of direct criminal contempt "shall include a recital of those facts upon which the adjudication of guilt is based." Gidden, 613 So. 2d at 459. "Purely conclusory statements will not meet the requirement of a recitation of facts. For example, citing the contemnor's 'unjudicious, unethical and intemperate conduct before the court' is insufficient." McRoy, 31 So. 3d at 274-75.
With respect to the orders entered by the trial court, Michaels was found in direct criminal contempt for two acts that  allegedly occurred during the same time period. Specifically, Michaels was found in direct criminal contempt for: (1) "inappropriate violent gestures" (Order 1) and "violent and offensive physical gestures" (Order 2); and (2) "mumbling "F**k you" at the podium" (Order 1) and "using foul language, To Wit: 'F**k you' and or the equivalent term in Romanian." (Order 2).
With respect to the first act, I concur in reversing the conviction of direct criminal contempt as there is no evidence that Michaels used "inappropriate violent gestures" or used "violent and offensive physical gestures." The record shows that Michaels raised his arm in response to an objection. Every witness—including the witness on the stand at the time of the incident, the two assistant state attorneys (including Von Zamft), and the judicial assistant of another trial court judge who was present in the courtroom at the time of the incident—testified that Michaels did not make an inappropriate, violent or physical hand gesture.
Despite this uniformly consistent and unrebutted testimony, the trial court found Michaels in direct criminal contempt for "inappropriate violent gestures" (Order 1) and for "using violent and offensive physical gestures." (Order 2) The trial court further found that these gestures "obstructed the proceedings and administration of justice." These findings are unsupported by any of the sworn testimony, and do not come close to meeting the standard for holding an individual in direct criminal contempt. Indeed, since it is undisputed that Michaels did not obstruct the proceeding or the administration of justice with any improper physical gestures, there is no evidence that improper physical gestures by Michaels embarrassed, hindered or obstructed the court in the administration of justice. Instead, the record suggests that the only individual who may have obstructed and disrupted the proceedings was Von Zamft, who had to be restrained by his co-counsel. Accordingly, because the judgment of contempt regarding improper physical gestures is not objectively supported by the record, the judgment is procedurally defective and cannot sustain a conviction for direct criminal contempt.
Concerning the second act, the mouthed obscenity, the law is clear that while the use of an obscenity in a courtroom may be contemptuous, see Peters v. State, 626 So. 2d 1048, 1049 (Fla. 4th DCA 1993), not "every profane utterance made in the courtroom is automatically contemptuous. [Indeed] [t]he challenged statements must be viewed in the context in which they were made." Martinez v. State, 339 So. 2d 1133, 1135 (Fla. 2d DCA 1976). Factors to be considered include whether the obscenity was heard in the courtroom, whether it was directed at the court, and whether the language hindered the ordinary function of the trial court. See Davila, 100 So. 3d at 263 (reversing conviction for direct criminal contempt where defendant said "[f]**k this court" under his breath, it was not heard by the trial court, and it did not interrupt proceeding); Woodie v. Campbell, 960 So. 2d 877, 878 (Fla. 1st DCA 2007) (finding no direct criminal contempt where trial court did not hear appellant say one-word expletive directed toward the trial court and it did not interrupt ordinary function of the trial court; "To constitute direct criminal contempt, however, the profane statement must be heard by the court and committed in the court's actual presence."); Bryant v. State, 851 So. 2d 823 (Fla. 2d DCA 2003) (granting petition for writ of habeas corpus and vacating judgment and sentence for direct criminal contempt where petitioner's foul language was not directed toward the trial court or the judicial proceedings); Payne v. State, 486 So. 2d 74 (Fla. 4th DCA 1986) (reversing  direct criminal contempt conviction where judge heard one-word expletive, not the alleged comment which two witnesses claimed to have heard).
Applying the requisite objective standard, the record does not support a finding that an isolated, inaudible utterance in Romanian that was not directed at the trial court is sufficient to sustain a finding of direct criminal contempt. While Michaels admits that he mouthed an obscenity in Romanian under his breath during the hearing, it is undisputed that every witness testified that they did not hear Michaels's utterance. Moreover, the isolated utterance was done after opposing counsel had interrupted Michaels's questioning, walked up to the podium, shook his fist at Michaels, and threatened to move to have Michaels involuntarily committed under the "Baker Act."
Additionally, there is nothing in the record to indicate that the utterance was directed at the trial court, nor is there anything in the record to establish how the trial court translated Michaels's mumbled utterance from Romanian to the English obscenity quoted in its orders. Indeed, the trial court's two orders make it clear that the trial court is not even sure whether Michaels muttered "F**k you" or whether he said something in Romanian. The trial court's uncertainty confirms the failure to satisfy the "beyond a reasonable doubt standard" required for finding an individual in direct criminal contempt. Because the power of contempt must be exercised rarely and cautiously, "[t]he provocation must never be slight, doubtful or of shifting interpretations. The occasion should be real and necessary, not murky, and not ameliorated in some less formal manner." McRoy, 31 So. 3d at 275; Davila, 100 So. 3d at 264.
The trial court's order also warrants reversal as the record lacks the necessary intent required to sustain a finding of direct criminal contempt. "Criminal contempt requires some willful act or omission calculated to hinder the orderly functions of the court." Davila, 100 So. 3d at 264 (emphasis added). See also Woods v. State, 987 So. 2d 669, 677 (Fla. 2d DCA 2007) ("[A]n intent beyond mere rudeness was required before the court could adjudicate Mr. Woods guilty of direct criminal contempt. The trial court had to establish that Mr. Woods' statement, coupled with his actions, were intended to constitute an imminent threat to the administration of justice."); Woodie, 960 So. 2d at 878-79 ("Criminal contempt requires some willful act or omission calculated to hinder the orderly functions of the court."). See generally Ex parte Earman, 95 So. at 762-63 (direct criminal contempt cannot be sustained where record did not establish intent to embarrass the court in the administration of justice).
Significantly, nothing in the record establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that Michaels intended to disrupt or hinder the court proceeding by his inaudible utterance in Romanian. There is no evidence that Michaels's isolated utterance was "calculated to cause harm" — a prerequisite for a finding that the conduct charged is contemptuous; and the record is also devoid of any evidence of willful or deliberate intent to disrupt. In fact, the record evidence is to the contrary. Under oath, Michaels testified that he mouthed a profanity in Romanian, and not in English, because he did not want to interrupt the proceedings or be offensive. Moreover, Michaels was reacting to Von Zamft's threat to Baker Act him, and Von Zamft's physical behavior that required his fellow assistant state attorney to physically restrain him, not any statement or ruling by the trial court. See, e.g., Davila, 100 So. 3d at 264 (during contempt hearing, defendant  explained that he was frustrated by the system and his situation so that his statement "F*** the court" was not calculated "to hinder the functions of the court, but merely spoke[n] out of understandable frustration"); Woods, 987 So. 2d at 678 (defendant's expletive "is somewhat understandable given that he was charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm though he had never been convicted of a felony"). See also Ex parte Earman, 95 So. at 762 (unrebutted testimony under oath established lack of intent and therefore could not sustain adjudication of direct criminal contempt).
"Contempt does not exist just because a judge feels aggrieved or vexed." McRoy, 31 So. 3d at 274; see also Ex parte Earman, 95 So. at 762-63. As this Court has previously held, "[i]n the absence of any evidence of willful or deliberate intent to disrupt, it should be rare that the mere use of a word or phrase which may have negative or distasteful connotations will be sufficient to constitute criminal contempt." Davila, 100 So. 3d at 264 (quoting Murrell v. State, 595 So. 2d 1049, 1051 (Fla. 4th DCA 1992)). In reversing the finding of criminal contempt, this Court in Davila found that "when given the chance to explain, Davila stated that he was frustrated with the system and his situation and didn't mean to 'come in that form and tone.' This clearly shows that Davila did not calculate to hinder the functions of the court, but merely spoke out of understandable frustration." Id. at 264. Here, as in Davila, the record fails to show that Michaels intended to hinder the functions of the court. Indeed, as in Davila, when given the chance to explain his conduct Michaels testified that when he becomes frustrated he reverts to his native language, Romanian, so that he will not be offensive. The unrebutted testimony under oath, therefore, established that Michaels lacked the intent necessary to be found in direct criminal contempt.
Additionally, the ability of the trial court to continue with its normal functions after the alleged contemptuous conduct occurred weighs against any finding that the conduct hindered the administration of justice. See Woodie, 960 So. 2d at 879 (calling judge a "stupid bitch" as defendant walked past counsel table "did not interrupt or hinder the orderly functions of the court, as the trial court had moved on to another hearing"); Davila, 100 So. 3d at 264 (defendant's utterance of "F*** this court" under his breath did not interrupt the proceedings or hinder administration of justice where trial court moved on to next case without hesitation). See also Ex parte Earman, 95 So. at 763 (A letter allegedly accusing court of susceptibility to corruption did not hinder administration of justice where judge "did, in fact dispose of the case in due course within his judicial function. This shows that the judicial functions were not impeded."). Here, the record shows that the trial court proceeded to sustain an objection after Michaels muttered the inaudible comment in Romanian.6 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the majority finds that an inaudible comment muttered in a foreign language that is not understood by the Court or any of those  present at the hearing, that was not directed at the bench, and that was made in response to opposing counsel's inappropriate and disruptive behavior can form the proper basis for direct criminal contempt. Significantly, the majority's opinion states that "there can be no question the conduct at issue [the mumble] hindered the trial court in the administration of justice." As discussed above, none of the three cases cited by the majority—Ex parte Earman, Woodie, and Saunders7  —support that conclusion.
In each of those cases, the contemptuous conduct was directed at the bench. That did not occur here. In Saunders, the only one of these three cases that affirmed a finding of direct criminal contempt, the defendant, after shaking his fist at the bench, called the trial court a "son-of-a-bitch" as he was being led out of the courtroom. This profanity was heard by the bailiff and transcribed by the court reporter. Nothing like that occurred here. Moreover, both Earman and Woodie found a lack of intent necessary to sustain a finding of direct criminal contempt. As discussed above, the record here is bereft of support for any such finding by the trial court, and, in fact, the only evidence on that point directly contradicts the conclusory statement in the trial court's order. I, therefore, respectfully dissent as I do not believe that either the facts or the law provide a basis for the trial court's orders finding Michaels in direct criminal contempt on this ground, and the majority's decision is contrary to this Court's opinions in both Davila and Krueger.
Finally, the trial court's sentence of two (2) days imprisonment is directly contrary to the Florida Supreme Court's mandate that the punishment must be appropriate to the offence and not excessive. "[T]he penalty should have reference to the nature and enormity of the act complained of and to the wrong done to the court." Ex parte Earman, 95 So at 761. Any imprisonment for an inaudible utterance not directed at the trial court, made in response to frustration with opposing counsel's own behavior, and muttered in a foreign language unknown to either the trial court or any of the individuals present in the courtroom is not appropriate to the charged offense and is excessive.
Direct criminal contempt is a serious matter, and an officer of the court who manifests disdain for the bench and disrupts court proceedings and the administration of justice warrants being held in direct criminal contempt. Michaels's actions, while unprofessional, do not merit that level of penalty. Indeed, his actions, as the witnesses present in the courtroom uniformly testified, did not disrupt or hinder the administration of justice. If anything, the record suggests that it was the behavior of Von Zamft that disrupted the proceedings that particular afternoon.
We do and should expect better behavior from attorneys licensed by the Florida Bar, and Florida trial courts are well within their discretion to deploy the various tools available to them in order to curtail and penalize the type of behavior that occurred that afternoon. In this instance, however, the trial court moved too quickly to mete out the severest penalty, direct criminal contempt and incarceration, as evidenced by the flaws in both of the orders. "Trial judges must be allowed to control their courtrooms. They must have the tools suitable to the purpose when the loss of control is threatened and the dignity and purpose of the court are challenged. However, because of the potency of the powerful remedy of criminal contempt, we must carefully guard the requirements for  its use, premised only on indisputable record support." McRoy, 31 So. 3d at 275.
III. CONCLUSION
"[T]he power to adjudge anyone with contempt is always to be exercised with care and circumspection." State v. Clemmons, 150 So. 2d 231, 234 (Fla. 1963).
[J]udges should approach the possible exercise of this unique power with the same hesitant caution and wariness one would use in picking up a glowing ember. It must be used only rarely and with circumspection. The provocation must never be slight, doubtful, or of shifting interpretations. The occasion should be real and necessary, not murky, and not ameliorated in some less formal manner.
Woods, 987 So. 2d at 676 (quoting Schenck v. State, 645 So. 2d 71, 74 (Fla. 4th DCA 1994) (citations omitted)).
Here, the requisite proof required for direct criminal contempt is sorely lacking. Because the record fails to support a finding of direct criminal contempt on both charged offenses, I would grant the petition for writ of habeas corpus, and remand with directions to the trial court to vacate the judgment and sentence for direct criminal contempt.

 

