, concurring in part and concurring in the judgments, joined by FISHER, CHAGARES, JORDAN, and NYGAARD, Circuit Judges.
The Second Amendment secures an individual "right of the people" to keep and bear arms unconnected to service in the militia. District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570, 595, 128 S. Ct. 2783, 171 L. Ed. 2d 637 (2008). This "pre-existing" right was included in the Bill of Rights in light of the troubles the colonists experienced under British rule and the Founders' appreciation of the considerable power that was transferred to the new federal government. Without a specific guarantee in our fundamental charter, it was feared that "the people" might one day be disarmed. See id. at 598-99. At the same time, the Founders understood that not everyone possessed Second Amendment rights. These appeals require us to decide who count among "the people" entitled to keep and bear arms.
The laws of the United States prohibit felons and certain misdemeanants from possessing firearms. 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). Guided by the Supreme Court's characterization of felon dispossession as "presumptively lawful" in Heller, we held in United States v. Barton that this prohibition does not on its face violate the Second Amendment. 633 F.3d 168 (3d Cir. 2011). In doing so we stated that § 922(g)(1) remains subject to as-applied constitutional challenges. Id. at 172-75. These consolidated appeals present two such challenges. Daniel Binderup and Julio Suarez—each permanently barred from possessing firearms because of prior misdemeanor convictions—contend that § 922(g)(1) is unconstitutional as applied to them.
It is. The most cogent principle that can be drawn from traditional limitations on the right to keep and bear arms is that dangerous persons likely to use firearms for illicit purposes were not understood to be protected by the Second Amendment. And because Binderup and Suarez have demonstrated that their crimes of conviction were nonviolent and that their personal circumstances are distinguishable from those of persons who do not enjoy Second Amendment rights because of their demonstrated proclivity for violence, the judgments of the District Courts must be affirmed.
I
We agree with all our colleagues that Binderup and Suarez are subject to disarmament under the plain terms of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).1  We also agree with Judges Ambro, Smith, and Greenaway that the District Court correctly held that § 922(g)(1) is unconstitutional as applied to Binderup and Suarez. But we perceive flaws in Judge Ambro's opinion.2 
 To begin with, our colleagues misapprehend the traditional justifications underlying felon dispossession, substituting a vague "virtue" requirement that is belied by the historical record. Then, under the guise of "reaffirm[ing]" the two-step test of United States v. Marzzarella, Ambro Op. 6, they actually expand that test—and along with it, the judicial power. For our colleagues hold that even with respect to persons entitled to Second Amendment rights, judges may pick and choose whom the government may permanently disarm if the judges approve of the legislature's interest balancing. Despite Binderup's and Suarez's success today, our colleagues have retained "the power to decide on a case-by-case basis whether the [Second Amendment] right is really worth insisting upon." Heller, 554 U.S. at 634. This is demonstrated by the fact that all but three of our dissenting colleagues—who have concluded that all as-applied challenges to § 922(g)(1) must fail—join the bulk of Judge Ambro's constitutional analysis. By contrast, we would hold—consistent with Heller—that non-dangerous persons convicted of offenses unassociated with violence may rebut the presumed constitutionality of § 922(g)(1) on an as-applied basis, and that when a law eviscerates the core of the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms (as § 922(g)(1) does by criminalizing exercise of the right entirely), it is categorically unconstitutional.
A
The Second Amendment provides: "A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed." U.S. Const. amend. II. In Heller, the Supreme Court held the Second Amendment protects an individual right to possess a firearm unconnected to service in a militia, and to use that weapon for traditionally lawful purposes, such as self-defense within the home. 554 U.S. at 595. The Second Amendment "elevates above all other interests the right of law-abiding, responsible citizens to use arms in defense of hearth and home"—a right that is at the "core" of the Second Amendment. Id. at 635 (emphasis added). Two years after Heller, in McDonald v. City of Chicago, the Court held the Fourteenth Amendment "incorporates the Second Amendment right recognized in Heller," explaining that the right is "fundamental" to "our system of ordered liberty." 561 U.S. 742, 778, 130 S. Ct. 3020, 177 L. Ed. 2d 894 (2010).
Although the Second Amendment is an enumerated fundamental right, it is "not unlimited." Heller, 554 U.S. at 626. "No fundamental right—not even the First Amendment—is absolute." McDonald, 561 U.S. at 802 (Scalia, J., concurring). A range of "who," "what," "where," "when," and "how" restrictions relating to firearms are permitted—many based on the scope of the Second Amendment and others based on their satisfaction of some level of heightened scrutiny. See Eugene Volokh, Implementing the Right to Keep and Bear Arms for Self-Defense: An Analytical Framework and A Research Agenda, 56 UCLA L. Rev. 1443, 1443 (2009) (distinguishing between "'what' restrictions (such as bans on machine guns, so-called 'assault weapons,' or unpersonalized handguns), 'who' restrictions (such as bans on possession by felons, misdemeanants, noncitizens, or 18-to-20-year-olds), 'where' restrictions (such as bans on carrying in public, in places that  serve alcohol, or in parks, or bans on possessing [guns] in public housing projects), 'how' restrictions (such as storage regulations), [and] 'when' restrictions (such as waiting periods)"); United States v. Huitron-Guizar, 678 F.3d 1164, 1166 (10th Cir. 2012) (applying the same heuristic).
For instance, the right is "not a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose." Heller, 554 U.S. at 626. Likewise, the Supreme Court has acknowledged the "historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying of dangerous and unusual weapons." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). In addition, Heller catalogued a non-exhaustive list of "presumptively lawful regulatory measures" that have historically constrained the parameters of the right. Id. at 627 n.26. These include "longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, . . . laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings, [and] laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms."3  Id. at 626-27. Critically, such "traditional restrictions go to show the scope of the right, not its lack of fundamental character." McDonald, 561 U.S. at 802 (Scalia, J., concurring) (emphasis added). The reason, for example, that the Second Amendment "does not protect those weapons not typically possessed by law-abiding citizens for lawful purposes, such as short-barreled shotguns," is that they fall outside the historical "scope of the right"—not that the right yields to some important or compelling government interest. Heller, 554 U.S. at 625; see also United States v. Marzzarella, 614 F.3d 85, 91 (3d Cir. 2010).
The Supreme Court has not yet heard an as-applied Second Amendment challenge to a presumptively lawful ban on firearms possession. But that fact makes Heller and McDonald no less binding on our inquiry here.
B 
1
Two of our decisions pertain to Binderup's and Suarez's as-applied challenges in these appeals. United States v. Marzzarella involved an as-applied challenge to a conviction under 18 U.S.C. § 922(k), which prohibits the possession of a handgun with an obliterated serial number—a "what" restriction limiting possession of a certain category of firearms. 614 F.3d at 87. Because this statute was not included in Heller's list of presumptively lawful firearm regulations, we gleaned from Heller a "two-pronged approach to Second Amendment challenges." Id. at 89. We first consider "whether the challenged law imposes a burden on conduct falling within the scope of the Second Amendment's guarantee." Id. If the conduct lies outside the Second Amendment's scope, the right does not apply and the challenged law must stand. But if the law burdens protected  conduct, we determined that the proper course is to "evaluate the law under some form of means-end scrutiny." Id. "If the law passes muster under that standard, it is constitutional. If it fails, it is invalid." Id.
Applying that test to § 922(k)'s ban on the possession of firearms with obliterated serial numbers, we held that the law "would pass constitutional muster even if it burdens protected conduct." Id. at 95. In other words, we skipped the first step and proceeded to apply means-ends scrutiny. We chose intermediate scrutiny4  because "[t]he burden imposed by the law does not severely limit the possession of firearms" and does not bar possession of an entire class of firearms. Id. at 97. Under that standard, we concluded that the law is constitutional because it fits reasonably with the substantial or important "law enforcement interest in enabling the tracing of weapons via their serial numbers." Id. at 98. We also opined that the law would pass strict scrutiny5  because it serves a compelling government interest through the "least-restrictive" means. Id. at 100.
A year after Marzzarella we decided Barton, which involved facial and as-applied challenges to the very law in question here: § 922(g)(1). Unlike the law at issue in Marzzarella—the "what" restriction codified in § 922(k)—the statute at issue in Barton (and in these appeals) was a presumptively lawful "who" restriction that prohibits certain people from possessing guns because of their membership in a criminal class. Barton was a felon who had been convicted of possessing firearms and ammunition in violation of § 922(g)(1). Barton, 633 F.3d at 169. We readily concluded that his facial challenge "must fail" in light of Heller's list of presumptively lawful firearm regulations. Id. at 172. We reasoned that since a facial challenge requires a showing that the challenged law "is unconstitutional in all of its applications," Heller foreclosed a facial challenge to § 922(g)(1) because it is "presumptively lawful," meaning that, "under most circumstances, [it] regulate[s] conduct which is unprotected by the Second Amendment." Id.
Most relevant to these appeals is our analysis of Barton's as-applied challenge to § 922(g)(1). In that regard, we first determined that "Heller's statement regarding the presumptive validity of felon gun dispossession statutes does not foreclose" an as-applied challenge. Id. at 173. We reasoned that "[b]y describing the felon disarmament ban as presumptively lawful, the Supreme Court implied that the presumption may be rebutted."6  Id. at 173 (internal citation and quotation marks omitted).
 Next, we explained what was required to mount a successful as-applied Second Amendment challenge to § 922(g)(1). We looked to the "historical pedigree" of the statute to ascertain "whether the traditional justifications underlying the statute support a finding of permanent disability in this case." Id; see also id. at 175 (noting that the constitutionality of the felon dispossession statute under the Second Amendment right depends "upon whom the right was intended to protect") (emphasis in original). Our analysis revealed that although persons convicted of violent crimes have been barred from firearm possession since 1931, it wasn't until thirty years later that Congress dispossessed nonviolent felons. Id. at 173. The historical record demonstrated that "the common  law right to keep and bear arms did not extend to those who were likely to commit violent offenses." Id. Accordingly, we determined that the exclusion of felons and other criminals from the scope of the Second Amendment's protections was tethered to the time-honored practice of keeping firearms out of the hands of those likely to commit violent crimes. Id.
For the reasons discussed, we concluded that "[t]o raise a successful as-applied challenge, [one] must present facts about himself and his background that distinguish his circumstances from those of persons historically barred from Second Amendment protections." Id. at 174. We explained further:
For instance, a felon convicted of a minor, non-violent crime might show that he is no more dangerous than a typical law-abiding citizen. Similarly, a court might find that a felon whose crime of conviction is decades-old poses no continuing threat to society.
Id. (internal citation omitted).
We had no trouble concluding that Barton failed to make this showing because he could not demonstrate that he was "no more likely than the typical citizen to commit a crime of violence." Id. To begin with, his prior disqualifying convictions were for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute and for receipt of a stolen firearm. Id. As we explained, "[c]ourts have held in a number of contexts that offenses relating to drug trafficking and receiving stolen weapons are closely related to violent crime"—again, the relevant historical justification for excluding the class of which Barton was a member from the Second Amendment's protections. Id. The record also indicated that Barton had not been rehabilitated such that he was "no more dangerous than a typical law-abiding citizen." Id. Indeed, he had recently admitted to selling a firearm with an obliterated serial number to a police informant. Id. For those reasons, we rejected Barton's as-applied challenge because he had failed "to demonstrate that his circumstances place him outside the intended scope of § 922(g)(1)." Id.
2
Our decisions in Marzzarella and Barton show that the threshold question in a Second Amendment challenge is one of scope: whether the Second Amendment protects the person, the weapon, or the activity in the first place. This requires an inquiry into "text and history." Heller, 554 U.S. at 595. "Constitutional rights are enshrined with the scope they were understood to have when the people adopted them, whether or not future legislatures or (yes) even future judges think that scope too broad." Id. at 634-35. The "critical tool of constitutional interpretation" in this area is "examination of a variety of legal and other sources to determine the public understanding of a legal text in the period after its enactment or ratification." Id. at 605 (emphasis in original); see also Ezell v. City of Chicago, 651 F.3d 684, 702 (7th Cir. 2011) ("Heller suggests that some federal gun laws will survive Second Amendment challenge because they regulate activity falling outside the scope of the right as publicly understood when the Bill of Rights was ratified; McDonald confirms that if the claim concerns a state or local law, the 'scope' question asks how the right was publicly understood when the Fourteenth Amendment was proposed and ratified."). Hence, the scope of the right is discerned with reference to the "historical justifications" underlying traditional limits on the right's coverage. Heller, 554 U.S. at 635. The test we enunciated in Barton was directed at this very question. See Barton, 633 F.3d at 173 ("[T]o evaluate [an] as-applied challenge [to § 922(g)(1)], we look to [its] historical pedigree . . . to determine whether the traditional justifications underlying the statute support a finding of permanent disability in this case.").
The fact that Barton speaks to scope does not mean, as our colleagues and the Government insist, that it requires application of means-end scrutiny once it is determined that a presumptively lawful regulation has dispossessed someone who falls within the protection of the Second Amendment. It is true that courts typically apply some form of means-end scrutiny to as-applied challenges once it has been determined that the law in question burdens protected conduct. But when, as in these appeals, it comes to an as-applied challenge to a presumptively lawful regulation that entirely bars the challenger from exercising the core Second Amendment right, any resort to means-end scrutiny is inappropriate once it has been determined that the challenger's circumstances distinguish him from the historical justifications supporting the regulation. This is because such laws are categorically invalid as applied to persons entitled to Second Amendment protection—a matter of scope.
This principle is based on Heller itself. That decision invalidated a municipal law that banned handgun possession in the home and required any lawful firearm to be kept disassembled and bound by a trigger lock at all times, rendering it inoperable.7  Heller, 554 U.S. at 628. Especially significant for these appeals, the Court eschewed means-end scrutiny in assessing the constitutionality of the ban. Because the law precluded individuals from possessing an important class of firearms in the home even for self-defense (the right at the "core" of the Second Amendment) and required that all firearms within the home be rendered inoperable, it was unconstitutional without regard to governmental interests supporting the law or their overall "fit" with the regulation. See Heller, 554 U.S. at 629-30.
Heller's reasoning bears this out. Specifically, with respect to the District of Columbia's requirement that all firearms in the home be "kept inoperable at all times," the Court said: "[t]his makes it impossible for citizens to use them for the core lawful purpose of self-defense and is hence unconstitutional." Id. at 630 (emphasis added). Conspicuously absent from the Court's analysis is any mention of means-end scrutiny. Instead, the Court reasoned categorically: (1) the regulation entirely deprives protected persons from exercising the core of the Second Amendment right; (2) it's therefore unconstitutional. The same went for the District of Columbia's handgun ban. After concluding that the Second Amendment includes handguns, the Court didn't mince words: "[w]hatever the reason, handguns are the most popular weapon chosen by Americans for self-defense in the home, and a complete prohibition of their use is invalid." Id. at 629 (emphasis added). A nineteenth century authority quoted by the Supreme Court in the paragraph preceding this conclusion should eliminate any doubt regarding the Court's categorical approach: "A statute which, under the pretence of regulating, amounts to a destruction of the right, or which requires arms to be so borne as to render them wholly useless for the purpose of defence, would be clearly unconstitutional." Id. (quoting State v. Reid, 1 Ala. 612, 616-617 (1840)) (emphases added); see also Bliss v. Com., 12 Ky. 90, 91 (1822) (suggesting that  a regulation that "import[s] an entire destruction of the right of the citizens to bear arms in defense of themselves and the state" would be plainly unconstitutional). Hence, a law that burdens persons, arms, or conduct protected by the Second Amendment and that does so with the effect that the core of the right is eviscerated is unconstitutional.8 
We are not the first to recognize this categorical rule. As the Seventh Circuit has explained, "[b]oth Heller and McDonald suggest that broadly prohibitory laws restricting the core Second Amendment right—like the handgun bans at issue in those cases, which prohibited handgun possession even in the home—are categorically unconstitutional." Ezell, 651 F.3d at 703; see also Joseph Blocher, Categoricalism and Balancing in First and Second Amendment Analysis, 84 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 375, 380 (2009) ("Rather than adopting one of the First Amendment's many Frankfurter-inspired balancing approaches, the majority endorsed a categorical test under which some types of 'Arms' and arms-usage are protected absolutely from bans and some types of 'Arms' and people are excluded entirely from constitutional coverage."); Heller v. D.C., 670 F.3d 1244, 1272-73, 399 U.S. App. D.C. 314 (D.C. Cir. 2011) (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting) ("As to the ban on handguns[,] . . . the Supreme Court in Heller never asked whether the law was narrowly tailored to serve a compelling government interest (strict scrutiny) or substantially related to an important government interest (intermediate scrutiny). If the Supreme Court had meant to adopt one of those tests, it could have said so in Heller and measured D.C.'s handgun ban against the relevant standard. But the Court did not do so; it instead determined that handguns had not traditionally been banned and were in common use—and thus that D.C.'s handgun ban was unconstitutional."); Peruta v. Cnty. of San Diego, 742 F.3d 1144, 1170 (9th Cir. 2014) ("[T]he rare law that 'destroys' the [core Second Amendment] right" requires "Heller-style per se invalidation.") (O'Scannlain, J.), rev'd on reh'g en banc, 824 F.3d 919, 2016 WL 3194315 (9th Cir. 2016).
Although we suspect that most firearm regulations probably will not trigger this categorical rule, § 922(g)(1) certainly does. As applied to someone who falls within the protective scope of the Second Amendment, § 922(g)(1) goes even further than the "severe restriction" struck down in Heller: it completely eviscerates the Second Amendment right.9  Cf. United States v. McCane, 573 F.3d 1037, 1049 (10th Cir. 2009) (Tymkovich, J., concurring) (recognizing that "the broad scope of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1)—which permanently disqualifies all felons from possessing firearms—would conflict with the 'core' self-defense right embodied in the Second Amendment"  to the extent that its presumptive validity does not attach) (emphasis in original). Indeed, the Government's contention that one can fall within the protective scope of the Second Amendment yet nevertheless be permanently deprived of the right transforms what it means to possess a "right." Boiled down to its essence, the Government's position goes something like this: "You have the right to keep and bear arms, but you may never exercise that right because we have supplied good reasons." This understanding of the Second Amendment is too parsimonious a view of a constitutional right because a "right" that entitles its holder to nothing whatsoever "is no constitutional guarantee at all." Heller, 554 U.S. at 634. When the Second Amendment applies, its core guarantee cannot be withdrawn by the legislature or balanced away by the courts.10  Rather, "[t]he very enumeration of the right takes out of the hands of government—even the Third Branch of Government—the power to decide on a case-by-case basis whether the right is really worth insisting upon." Id. at 634.11 
For the reasons stated, Barton alone provides the standard for an as-applied Second Amendment challenge to a presumptively lawful regulatory measure (like § 922(g)(1)) that denies a core Second Amendment  right to a certain class of persons. And our opinion in that case explains the two things an individual must do to mount a successful as-applied challenge. First, he must identify the traditional justifications for excluding from Second Amendment protections the class of which he is a member. See Barton, 633 F.3d at 172. Only justifications with "historical pedigree" are relevant for regulations imposing a permanent disability. Id. Second, he must present facts about himself and his background that distinguish his circumstances from those of persons in the historically barred class. Id. at 174. These facts must speak to the traditional justifications that legitimize the class's disability. In Barton we noted at least two ways of doing this: (1) "a felon convicted of a minor, non-violent crime might show that he is no more dangerous than a typical law-abiding citizen," or (2) "a court might find that a felon whose crime of conviction is decades-old poses no continuing threat to society."12  Id.
This does not mean, of course, that a dispossessed individual can win an as-applied challenge by promising to behave well in the future.13  Courts must diligently inquire into the facts to determine whether a challenger has adequately distinguished his own circumstances from those of persons historically barred from Second Amendment protections. Heller and Barton place the burden on the challenger to rebut the presumptive lawfulness of § 922(g)(1). See Barton, 633 F.3d at 174. That's no easy task. Government evidence regarding one's criminal history will require the challenger to make a strong showing to distinguish himself from others with criminal records. But to deny one  even the opportunity to "develop [a] factual basis" in support of his constitutional claim would run afoul of both Supreme Court guidance regarding the scope of the Second Amendment and the concept of an as-applied challenge. Id. at 174.
II 
A
We agree with the District Courts that § 922(g)(1) is unconstitutional as applied to Binderup and Suarez. As far as the historical justification for felon dispossession goes, we explained it in Barton: the time-honored principle that the right to keep and bear arms does not extend to those likely to commit violent offenses. Because the Supreme Court declined to "expound upon the historical justifications" for the list of presumptively lawful firearm exclusions in Heller, 554 U.S. at 627 n.26, 635—leaving that task to us—Barton's rationale warrants further explication. As stated, Heller instructs that the public understanding of the scope of the right to keep and bear arms at the time of the Second Amendment's enactment dictates the scope of the right today. Id. at 605. In undertaking this inquiry, we are reminded that "[h]istorical analysis can be difficult; it sometimes requires resolving threshold questions, and making nuanced judgments about which evidence to consult and how to interpret it." McDonald, 561 U.S. at 803-04 (Scalia, J., concurring).
The most germane evidence available directly supports the conclusion that the founding generation did not understand the right to keep and bear arms to extend to certain categories of people deemed too dangerous to possess firearms. At the Pennsylvania ratifying convention, Constitutionalists and other opponents of the Federalists proposed language stating that "no law shall be passed for disarming the people or any of them unless for crimes committed, or real danger of public injury from individuals." The Address and Reasons of Dissent of the Minority of the Convention of Pennsylvania to their Constituents, reprinted in Bernard Schwartz, 2 The Bill of Rights: A Documentary History 662, 665 (1971) (emphasis added). Likewise, at the Massachusetts ratifying convention just months later, Samuel Adams offered a proposal that the "Constitution be never construed to authorize Congress . . . to prevent the people of the United States, who are peaceable citizens, from keeping their own arms." Journal of Convention: Wednesday February 6, 1788, reprinted in Debates and Proceedings in the Convention of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Held in the Year 1788, at 86 (Boston, William White 1856) (emphasis added). And the New Hampshire convention proposed that "Congress shall never disarm any Citizen unless such as are or have been in Actual Rebellion." Schwartz, 2 The Bill of Rights: A Documentary History at 761.
These proposals show that there was broad consensus between Federalists and their opponents on the existence and nature of the "natural right" to keep and bear arms for defensive purposes; what was controversial was whether the Constitution required a Bill of Rights to ensure the right to keep and bear arms (as so-called Anti-Federalists contended) or whether such an explicit guarantee was unnecessary in light of Congress's limited delegated powers and might in fact backfire by minimizing other, unenumerated liberties (as Federalists argued). See Stephen P. Halbrook, The Founders' Second Amendment 190-215 (surveying the debates at the ratifying conventions and highlighting the commonplace understanding that "dangerous persons could be disarmed"). Indeed, it is telling that in the crucibles of the ratifying conventions, such public declarations of the scope of the  right to keep and bear arms did not provoke any apparent disagreement. See id. As we summarized in Barton, the "[d]ebates from the Pennsylvania, Massachusetts and New Hampshire ratifying conventions, which were considered 'highly influential' by the Supreme Court in Heller . . . confirm that the common law right to keep and bear arms did not extend to those who were likely to commit violent offenses." 633 F.3d at 174. Hence, the best evidence we have indicates that the right to keep and bear arms was understood to exclude those who presented a danger to the public.
A number of firearms restrictions from the founding and pre-founding era support this conclusion. Aside from "complete bans on gun ownership by free blacks, slaves, Native Americans, and those of mixed race" (each of which today would be plainly unconstitutional), the founding generation also disarmed those who refused to pledge their loyalty to the Revolution, state, or nation. Adam Winkler, Heller's Catch-22, 56 UCLA L. Rev. 1551, 1562 (2009). As the Fifth Circuit has explained, "[a]lthough these Loyalists were neither criminals nor traitors, American legislators had determined that permitting these persons to keep and bear arms posed a potential danger." Nat'l Rifle Ass'n of Am., Inc. v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, & Explosives, 700 F.3d 185, 200 (5th Cir. 2012); see also United States v. Carpio-Leon, 701 F.3d 974, 980 (4th Cir. 2012) (noting that Massachusetts required participants in Shays' Rebellion to obtain a pardon for taking up arms against the state, to swear allegiance to the state, and to give up their firearms for three years). This principle had some roots in the English arms tradition, wherein the Crown had the authority "to disarm not only papists, but dangerous and disaffected persons as well." Patrick J. Charles, "Arms for Their Defence"?: An Historical, Legal, and Textual Analysis of the English Right to Have Arms and Whether the Second Amendment Should Be Incorporated in McDonald v. City of Chicago, 57 Clev. St. L. Rev. 351, 382 (2009); cf. Robert H. Churchill, Gun Regulation, the Police Power, and the Right to Keep Arms in Early America: The Legal Context of the Second Amendment, 25 L. & Hist. Rev. 139, 164 (2007) (noting that although "English law supplied ample precedent" to disarm "'dangerous' citizens," the power was rarely practiced by early American governments). In short, "from time immemorial, various jurisdictions recognizing a right to arms have . . . taken the step of forbidding suspect groups from having arms," and "American legislators at the time of the Bill of Rights seem to have been aware of this tradition." Don B. Kates & Clayton E. Cramer, Second Amendment Limitations and Criminological Considerations, 60 Hastings L.J. 1339, 1360 (2009); see also Marshall, 32 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y at 711-12 (examining later laws (upheld in courts) barring possession of firearms while intoxicated and possession of firearms by "tramps" (roaming beggars) and construing them in terms of the "present danger" of misconduct presented by such persons were they to carry firearms).
Although the debates from the ratifying conventions point strongly toward a limit on Second Amendment rights centered on dangerousness, dispossessory regulations enacted to that end were few and far between in the first century of our Republic. Consequently, some have reckoned that "[t]he historical evidence" regarding the scope of the Second Amendment "is inconclusive at best." United States v. Skoien, 614 F.3d 638, 650 (7th Cir. 2010) (en banc) (Sykes, J., dissenting). We disagree. Even though "[t]he Founding generation had no laws . . . denying the right [to keep and bear arms] to people convicted of crimes," Winkler, 56 UCLA L. Rev. at 1563, novelty does not mean unconstitutionality. After  all, "[t]he paucity of eighteenth century gun control laws might have reflected a lack of political demand rather than constitutional limitations." Nelson Lund, The Second Amendment, Heller, and Originalist Jurisprudence, 56 UCLA L. Rev. 1343, 1354 (2009).
Thus, a common thread running through the words and actions of the Founders gives us a distinct principle to inform our understanding of the original public meaning of the text of the Second Amendment. See, e.g., Marshall, 32 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y at 698 ("[A]ctual 'longstanding' precedent in America and pre-Founding England suggests that a firearms disability can be consistent with the Second Amendment to the extent that . . . its basis credibly indicates a present danger that one will misuse arms against others and the disability redresses that danger."); id. at 727-28 ("[T]o the extent that one can distill any guidance from the English disability and the Revolutionary disarmament, it would seem at most to be that persons who by their actions—not just their thoughts— betray a likelihood of violence against the state may be disarmed."); Stephen P. Halbrook, What the Framers Intended: A Linguistic Analysis of the Right to 'Bear Arms', 49 Law & Contemp. Probs. 151, 161 (1986) (concluding that "violent criminals, children, and those of unsound mind may be deprived of firearms" (emphasis added)). In sum, the historical record leads us to conclude that the public understanding of the scope of the Second Amendment was tethered to the principle that the Constitution permitted the dispossession of persons who demonstrated that they would present a danger to the public if armed.14 
 Section 922(g)(1) sweeps much more broadly than this traditional ground for disarmament. See Barton, 633 F.3d at 173 ("Although 18 U.S.C. § 922(g) was meant to keep firearms out of the hands of presumptively risky people, Congress did not bar non-violent felons from possessing guns until 1961.") (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); United States v. Booker, 644 F.3d 12, 24 & n.14 (1st Cir. 2011) ("[I]n covering only those with a record of violent crime, § 922(g)(9) [(dispossession of domestic violence misdemeanants)] is arguably more consistent with the historical regulation of firearms than § 922(g)(1)," which "applies to all individuals convicted of a federal felony, thus encompassing individuals convicted of crimes as disparate as tax evasion and bank robbery. This breadth, and particularly the inclusion of nonviolent offenses, constitutes a significant departure from earlier understandings of a 'felony.' At common law, for example, '[o]nly the most serious crimes' were considered to be felonies." (internal citations omitted)); supra n.14. The upshot of all this is that the as-applied constitutionality of § 922(g)(1) is tied to its historical justification: people who have demonstrated that they are likely to commit violent crimes have no constitutional right to keep and bear arms.15 
B
The Government's divergent reading of the historical scope of the Second Amendment—also adopted in different ways by Judges Ambro and Fuentes—is unconvincing. Relying on the republican notion of "civic virtue," the Government maintains that Binderup's and Suarez's misdemeanor convictions place them outside the class of "those members of the polity who were deemed capable of exercising [the right to keep and bear arms] in a virtuous manner." Gov't Suarez Br. 14 (quoting Saul Cornell, "Don't Know Much about History": The Current Crisis in Second Amendment Scholarship, 29 N. Ky. L Rev. 657, 679 (2002)). To be sure, "[s]ome scholarship suggests that at the time of the nation's founding, the right to bear arms was not understood to extend to those convicted of a felony, either because they were not believed to be among 'the people' whose right to bear arms was protected, or because they lacked the requisite 'virtue' necessary for firearm possession." Alexander C. Barrett, Note, Taking Aim at Felony Possession, 93 B.U. L. Rev. 163, 194-95 & n.197 (2013) (citing Don B. Kates, Jr., The Second Amendment: A Dialogue, 49 L. & Contemp. Probs. 143, 146 (1986) (offering that the right to keep and bear arms was tied to the idea of the "virtuous citizen," such that "the right to arms does not preclude laws disarming the unvirtuous (i.e., criminals) or those who, like children or the mentally unbalanced, are deemed incapable of virtue")); see also Don B. Kates, Jr. & Clayton E. Cramer, Second Amendment Limitations and Criminological Considerations, 60 Hastings L.J.  1339, 1360 (2009) ("[T]here is every reason to believe that the Founding Fathers would have deemed persons convicted of any of the common law felonies not to be among 'the [virtuous] people' to whom they were guaranteeing the right to arms.") (alteration in original).
This "virtue" standard—especially in the pliable version articulated by the Government—is implausible because the "civic republican" view of the scope of the Second Amendment is wrong. Although courts, scholars, and litigants have cited this supposed limitation,16  this virtuous-citizens-only conception of the right to keep and bear arms is closely associated with pre-Heller interpretations of the Second Amendment by proponents of the "sophisticated collective rights model" who rejected the view that the Amendment confers an individual right and instead characterized the right as a "civic right . . . . exercised by citizens, not individuals . . . who act together in a collective manner, for a distinctly public purpose: participation in a well regulated militia." Saul Cornell & Nathan DeDino, A Well Regulated Right: The Early American Origins of Gun Control, 73 Fordham L. Rev. 487, 491-92 (2004).17 
Moreover, this supposed limitation on the Second Amendment stems from a misreading of an academic debate about "ideological interpretation," Cornell & DeDino, 73 Fordham L. Rev. at 528 n.29, the gist of which concerns the extent to which the Founders were civic republicans or libertarians  as well as what bearing these ideologies might have had on how they understood the right to keep and bear arms. See Robert E. Shalhope, The Ideological Origins of the Second Amendment, 69 J. Am. Hist. 599, 599-601 (1982) (the article that served as contemporary scholars' principal source for the "virtuousness" limitation). Unfortunately, this literature sheds no light on "who" was thought to enjoy the right to keep and bear arms (at least, none beyond the now-settled individual-versus-collective right interpretation). Rather, it relates to the rationale for having a right to keep and bear arms in the first place. See id. at 606-07 (characterizing the right to keep and bear arms as one with both individual- and collective-right elements and claiming that the Founders' unique blend of republicanism and libertarianism led them to "perceive[] a vital relationship between vigorous republican husbandmen and the possession of arms" and believe that a "man capable of defending himself with arms if necessary was prerequisite for maintaining the moral character to be a good republican"); Robert E. Shalhope, The Armed Citizen in the Early Republic, 49 L. & Contemp. Probs. 125, 132 (1986) (explaining that strains of civic republicanism in early-American culture viewed arms possession as critical to the virtue of the citizenry and the spirit of the state, but never characterizing the possession of virtue as a prerequisite to arms rights).
This literature does not help us identify the types of people who were not entitled to exercise Second Amendment rights.18  Contemporary advocates of a "virtuousness" limitation have projected that constraint onto the right to keep and bear arms based on the fact that the very existence of the right was informed by republican philosophical principles.19  That is not enough. We have found no historical evidence on the public meaning of the right to keep and bear arms indicating that "virtuousness" was a limitation on one's qualification for the right—contemporary insistence to the contrary falls somewhere between guesswork and ipse dixit.
Furthermore, it is hard to understand what the Government's proposed "virtuousness" limitation would even require. The Government has offered no guidance in this regard, except to urge that we defer to legislative judgments about what sorts of offenses or characteristics render one insufficiently "virtuous" to enjoy a fundamental right. The Dissent and to a lesser extent Judge Ambro have accepted this approach. The legislative judgments set forth in the margin are but a few illustrations of its deep flaws.20  We doubt the  Founders designed a fundamental constitutional right to turn on such vagaries. Although it "befits a diverse nation of fifty sovereign States and countless municipalities . . . [that] gun regulation in the United States resembles a patchwork quilt that  largely reflects local custom," Drake v. Filko, 724 F.3d 426, 440 (3d Cir. 2013) (Hardiman, J., dissenting), to make an individual's entitlement to the Second Amendment right itself turn on the predilections of the legislature governing his or her patch is deference the Constitution won't bear. See McDonald, 561 U.S. at 750 (holding that "the Second Amendment right is fully applicable to the States" (emphasis added)).
Even if we were to attempt to apply the notion of civic virtue to felon dispossession, it is doubtful the Government would prevail. Although felons at common law "were essentially stripped of property and other rights," the term "felony" "applied only to a few very serious, very dangerous offenses such as murder, rape, arson, and robbery"—in other words, crimes closely associated with violence. Kates & Cramer, 60 Hastings L.J. at 1362. But see Marshall, 32 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y at 715-16 (casting doubt on the claim that a felony conviction necessarily entailed permanent dispossession). Indeed, one of the scholars cited by the Government concludes that insofar as a statute "would seek to bar arms possession by" persons who have been convicted of a nonviolent "felony" in the modern sense, "those laws would seem to be invalid." Kates & Cramer, 60 Hastings L.J. at 1363. See Barrett, 93 B.U. L. Rev. at 196 ("[E]ven if some felons were historically understood to be barred from possessing firearms, the common law term 'felony' applied to only a few select categories of serious crimes at the time the Second Amendment was ratified, while in modern times, vast categories of 'non-dangerous' activities qualify as felonious."); Marshall, 32 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y at 729-30 (explaining that the first federal felony dispossession laws applied only to a core group of crimes including "murder, manslaughter, rape, mayhem, aggravated assault . . . robbery, burglary, housebreaking, and attempt to commit any of these crimes"). And at least one of our sister courts faced with the virtuousness argument treated "virtue" as basically synonymous with "non-dangerous." See United States v. Rene E., 583 F.3d 8, 16 (1st Cir. 2009) ("To be sure, there is an ongoing debate among historians about the extent to which the right to bear arms in the founding period turned on concerns about the possessor's 'virtue,' i.e., on a legislative judgment that possession of firearms by a certain class of individuals would pose a serious danger to the public." (emphasis added)). Accordingly, we reject the Government's suggestion that Second Amendment protections are limited "to those members of the polity who were deemed capable of exercising [the right to keep and bear arms] in a virtuous manner." Gov't Suarez Br. 14.
C
All this means that Binderup and Suarez must distinguish themselves and their circumstances from those of persons not entitled to keep and bear arms because of their propensity for violence. And as the District Courts found, both men did so. Specifically, each is a misdemeanant convicted of a non-violent crime who has shown "that he is no more dangerous than a typical law-abiding citizen." See Barton, 633 F.3d at 174. While we agree with the Government that the felony-misdemeanor distinction is "minor and often arbitrary," especially since "numerous misdemeanors involve conduct more dangerous than many felonies," Gov't Binderup Br. 19 and Gov't Suarez Br. 18 (quoting Tennessee v. Garner, 471 U.S. 1, 14, 105 S. Ct. 1694, 85 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1985)), that is beside the point here. Our focus must remain on the legitimate (i.e., traditional) concern that justifies the dispossession of certain offenders: we cannot trust them not to commit violent crimes with firearms. The Government concedes that "the Supreme Court might  find some felonies so tame and technical as to be insufficient to justify the ban,"21  Gov't Binderup Br. 15 and Gov't Suarez Br. 15 (quoting United States v. Torres-Rosario, 658 F.3d 110, 113 (1st Cir. 2011)), but it insists that Binderup's and Suarez's misdemeanors do not qualify. We disagree.
For purposes of the traditional justifications animating § 922(g)(1), both Binderup's corruption of minors offense and Suarez's licensing violation were nonviolent misdemeanors. In Barton, we described the violent crimes of the sort that motivated felon dispossession since 1938 in the following way: "For nearly a quarter century, § 922(g)(1) had a narrower basis for a disability, limited to those convicted of a 'crime of violence.' 'Crimes of violence' were commonly understood to include only those offenses 'ordinarily committed with the aid of firearms.'" Barton, 633 F.3d at 173 (quoting Marshall, 32 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y at 698, 702 (2009)) (some internal quotation marks omitted); see also United States v. Chovan, 735 F.3d 1127, 1137 (9th Cir. 2013) (noting that the "Federal Firearms Act of 1938 only restricted firearm possession for those individuals convicted of a 'crime of violence,' defined as 'murder, manslaughter, rape, mayhem, kidnapping, burglary, housebreaking, and certain forms of aggravated assault—assault with intent to kill, commit rape, or rob; assault with a dangerous weapon, or assault with intent to commit any offense punishable by imprisonment for more than one year'"). Dispossession on the basis of a conviction for these sorts of crimes comports with the original public understanding of the scope of the right to keep and bear arms.
Neither Binderup's improper relationship with an employee capable of consent nor Suarez's possession of a handgun that he could have possessed lawfully had he acquired a license meets this description. Nor did their offenses involve any actual violent behavior. It is true that a small handful of States would classify Binderup's offense as statutory rape22  or sexual abuse. And there are certainly circumstances in which an inappropriate and illegal relationship like Binderup's might involve implicit or genuine violence. Such facts would make his a much different case. But as the District Court explained:
There is simply nothing in the record here which would support a reasonable inference that [Binderup] used any violence, force, or threat of force to initiate or maintain the sexual relationship with his seventeen-year-old employee. Moreover, there is no record evidence present here which would support a reasonable inference that [he] was convicted of any crime of violence (or that he even engaged in any violent or threatening conduct) before or after his November 1997 conviction for [c]orruption of minors.
Binderup, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 135110, 2014 WL 4764424, at *22. Nor is there any "record evidence [that] supports a reasonable inference that he has a propensity to commit violent acts, sexual or otherwise." 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 135110, [WL] at *23. In a real stretch, the Government likens Binderup's conduct to that which was felonized by a 1576 English statute that forbade "carnal[]  knowl[edge]" of "any woman child under the age of ten years." Gov't Binderup Br. 15-16 (quoting Mortimer Levine, A More Than Ordinary Case of "Rape," 13 and 14 Elizabeth I, 7 Am. J. Legal Hist. 159, 163 (1963)). Deplorable as it was, however, Binderup's conduct involved a seventeen-year-old capable of consent,23  was not subject to criminal sanction at the time of the founding, and—most importantly—did not involve violence, force, or threat of force.
The nonviolent nature of Suarez's offense is evident as well. The Government's unremarkable observation that Maryland's licensing requirement relates to public safety does not make Suarez's offense a violent crime. It neither involved the actual use or threatened use of force, nor was it "closely related to violent crime" in the way that drug trafficking and receiving stolen weapons are. See Barton, 633 F.3d at 174. Heller characterized the Second Amendment as guaranteeing "the right of law-abiding, responsible citizens to use arms in defense of hearth and home." 554 U.S. at 635 (emphasis added). The Government relies on the Fourth Circuit's decision in United States v. Pruess to argue that Suarez's violation of a lawful, well-established firearm regulation demonstrates that he is not a responsible, law-abiding citizen. That reliance is misplaced.
In Pruess, the Fourth Circuit rejected an as-applied challenge to § 922(g)(1) by a felon whose disqualifying convictions related to his prior sales of illegal arms, concluding that Pruess could not "rebut the presumption of lawfulness of the felon-in-possession prohibition as applied to him." 703 F.3d 242, 246 (4th Cir. 2012). Although Pruess, like Suarez, had committed regulatory violations, his circumstances were dissimilar from Suarez's in every other way. For example, Pruess had committed "repeated violations of the firearms laws, leading to at least twenty prior convictions," and admitted that although he "did not intend to use them for violence himself . . . he believed that [certain] weapons and ammunition underlying his convictions were stolen." Id. His repeated dealings in stolen, illegal weapons—such as fully automatic AK-47's and grenades—appropriately led the court to conclude that Pruess had committed acts "closely related to violent crime" and "flunk[ed] the 'law-abiding responsible citizen' requirement." Id. at 244, 246. Suarez, by comparison, committed a nonviolent firearms licensing offense with respect to an otherwise lawful weapon decades ago, the circumstances of which were unassociated with violence.24 
In addition to showing that neither their offenses nor the circumstances surrounding them involved any violence or threat of violence, Binderup and Suarez have also demonstrated that their subsequent behavior confirms their membership among the class of responsible, law-abiding citizens to whom Second Amendment protection extends. As the District Courts found, both  men presented compelling evidence that they are responsible citizens, each with a job, a family, and a clean record since 1997 and 1998. Their home State has seen fit to reinstate their right to keep and bear arms. And though it's by no means dispositive in Suarez's case, the fact that the United States deems him upright enough to entrust him with the Nation's secrets is further evidence that he is a "typical law-abiding citizen." Barton, 633 F.3d at 174.
The Government has presented no evidence that either Binderup or Suarez has been, or would be, dangerous, violent, or irresponsible with firearms.25  For all these reasons, the District Courts did not err when they found § 922(g)(1) unconstitutional as applied to Binderup and Suarez.
D
The Government cites a number of recidivism studies as a final justification for permanently disarming Binderup and Suarez. It notes that felons commit violent crimes more frequently than nonfelons. See Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Dep't of Justice, Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994 at 6 (2002) (finding that, within a population of 234,358 federal inmates released in 1994, the rates of arrest for homicides were 53 times the national average). Relatedly, it highlights a 1994 study finding that approximately one in five offenders imprisoned for nonviolent crimes were rearrested for violent offenses within three years of their release. See Bureau of Justice Statistics Fact Sheet, Profile of Nonviolent Offenders Exiting State Prisons, tbl.11 (Oct. 2004), available at http://bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/pnoesp.pdf. The Government's second piece of evidence is a study comparing denials of handgun purchases to convicted felons with successful purchases by persons arrested but not convicted of a felony. The study found that the "denial of handgun purchases is associated with a reduction in risk for later criminal activity of approximately 20% to 30%." Mona A. Wright et al., Effectiveness of Denial of Handgun Purchase to Persons Believed to Be at High Risk for Firearm Violence, 89 Am. J. of Pub. Health 88, 89 (1999).
Finally, with respect to Binderup, it notes that "[s]ex offenders" (which Binderup is not) "present a high risk of recidivism." Gov't Binderup Br. 28 (citing Pennsylvania Dep't of Corrections, Recidivism Report, 21 tbl. 12 (Feb. 8, 2013), available at http://www.nationalcia.org/wp-content/uploads/2013-PA-DOC-Recidivism-Report.pdf) (finding that 50 percent of persons convicted of statutory rape and 60.2 percent of those convicted of "[o]ther [s]exual [o]ffenses" were rearrested or reincarcerated within three years of release from Pennsylvania prison) and U.S. Dep't of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report: Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994, 8 tbls.9, 15, available at http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/rpr94.pdf (finding a 41.4 percent rearrest rate among persons convicted for "other sexual assault"). And with respect to Suarez, the Government emphasizes that persons arrested for "weapons offenses" are rearrested at high rates within a few years. Gov't Br. 30 & nn. 10-11 (citing studies). In addition, it relies upon a study indicating that California handgun purchasers in 1977 "who had prior convictions for nonviolent firearm-related offenses such as carrying concealed firearms in public, but none for violent  offenses," were over four times more likely to be charged with a later violent offense than a person with no criminal history. See Garen J. Wintemute et al., Prior Misdemeanor Convictions as a Risk Factor for Later Violent and Firearm-Related Criminal Activity Among Authorized Purchasers of Handguns, 280 Am. Med. Ass'n 2083, 2086 (1998).
The Government presents this evidence in its argument that § 922(g)(1) satisfies intermediate scrutiny as applied to Binderup and Suarez.26  But as we have explained, that inquiry is inappropriate in this case. Applying some form of 50 means-end scrutiny in an as-applied challenge against an absolute ban—after it has already been established that the individual has a right to keep and bear arms—eviscerates that right via judicial interest balancing in direct contravention of Heller. See McDonald, 561 U.S. at 785 ("In Heller . . . we expressly rejected the argument that the scope of the Second Amendment right should be determined by judicial interest balancing."). What matters, when it comes to a presumptively lawful regulation that eliminates the right to keep and bear arms, is whether Binderup and Suarez can distinguish themselves as responsible, law-abiding citizens in contrast to the class of persons historically understood to be excluded from Second Amendment protection.
Even if the Government's generalized studies are recast as addressing the issue of scope,27  they still fall short. Perhaps the Government might use statistics to demonstrate that persons who commit certain nonviolent crimes have a high likelihood of violent recidivism, even decades later. But that conclusion would stretch the notion of "close association" and the historical roots of felon disarmament. Moreover, it would require untangling a number of complicating variables, such as the effects of incarceration. Recidivism studies of this type would be better suited to demonstrating a means-end fit for less restrictive firearm regulations on criminals otherwise protected by the Second Amendment (such as waiting periods or licensing requirements). Either way, the studies cited by the Government don't cut it.
 First, Binderup and Suarez were not convicted of felonies and have never been incarcerated, which renders irrelevant most of the Government's studies. The Government argues that even criminals placed on probation rather than sent to prison have a heightened risk of recidivism. But the study it cites found that "[g]enerally, the risk of recidivism was highest during the first year after admission to probation," and that "[a]s released prisoners and probationers age, they tend to exhibit lower rates of recidivism." Iowa Div. of Crim. & Juvenile Justice Planning, Recidivism Among Iowa Probationers, at 2 (July 2005), available at http://publications.iowa.gov/15032/ (last visited Sept. 3, 2016). Given Binderup's and Suarez's ages, the study cited by the Government would predict that they pose a negligible chance of being arrested for a violent crime and a zero percent chance of being arrested for a violent felony. Id. at 39-40. Second, the denial-of-handgun survey was restricted to felons with extensive criminal records and conceded not only that the "modest benefit" it observed "may reflect the fact that the members of both study groups had extensive criminal records and therefore were at high risk for later criminal activity," but also that "this study was too small to determine whether the differences occurred by chance." Wright et al., 89 Am. J. of Pub. Health at 89.
Finally, the Government's sex-offender recidivism evidence paints with too broad a brush. Binderup's misdemeanor was not classified as a sexual offense and did not trigger a duty to register as a sex offender. Compare 18 Pa. Const. Stat. Ann. § 6301(a)(1)(i), with 18 Pa. Const. Stat. Ann. § 3103-3144. The report does not appear to cover corruption-of-minors recidivists and lumps Binderup together with an amalgam of persons guilty of a broad range of unspecified sexual offenses. See U.S. Dep't of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report: Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994, 8 tbls.9, 15. The same goes for the dated firearm-offense recidivism study the Government invokes against Suarez, which covers a wide, unspecified range of "nonviolent firearm-related offenses." Wintemute, 280 Am. Med. Ass'n at 2086. Common sense dictates that violent recidivism rates are different for drug dealers carrying unlicensed firearms to protect their turf and ordinary citizens carrying unlicensed firearms for self-defense (behavior that several states do not even criminalize). See GAO, States' Laws and Requirements for Concealed Carry Permits Vary Across Nation 8-9 (2012), available at http://www.gao.gov/assets/600/592552.pdf (last visited Sept. 3, 2016).
Without more, the Government's studies don't support the application of § 922(g)(1) to Binderup and Suarez. Given the uncontroverted evidence they have presented distinguishing themselves from persons who are not entitled to keep and bear arms, the Government needs to offer more than regression analyses of recidivism (largely by felons who, unlike Binderup and Suarez, were incarcerated). An as-applied challenge ultimately rests on the question of whether "application [of a statute] to a particular person under particular circumstances deprive[s] that person of a constitutional right." Marcavage, 609 F.3d at 273 (emphases added). Binderup and Suarez have presented unrebutted evidence that their offenses were nonviolent and now decades old, and that they present no threat to society, which places them within the class persons who have a right to keep and bear arms. Accordingly, 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) is unconstitutional as applied to them.
* * *
In the years since the Supreme Court's decision in Heller, courts have had to  wrestle with difficult Second Amendment questions. Although these questions can be challenging and the stakes high—the guarantee is one to deadly weapons, after all—it is no answer to say that legislatures "have near total control" over the right. Dissent at 61. That is not how constitutional rights work. Because their personal circumstances are distinguishable from those of the class of persons historically excluded from Second Amendment protections due to their propensity for violence, Daniel Binderup and Julio Suarez fall outside the proper scope of the felon dispossession statute. And their Second Amendment rights cannot be withdrawn merely because § 922(g)(1) broadly serves the public good. Where the Second Amendment's guarantees apply, as they do for Binderup and Suarez, "certain policy choices" are "necessarily" taken "off the table." Heller, 554 U.S. at 636. Forever prohibiting them from possessing any firearm is one of those policy choices.
