.
Petitioner Rene Montes Mayorga seeks review of an order of the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) because he claims it bans him from forever reentering the United States. In fact, the order under review has no effect on Mayorga's ability to reenter the country after ten years. Because the order Mayorga appeals from has not caused his stated injury, Mayorga lacks standing to challenge the agency's determination that he committed a crime involving moral turpitude (CIMT). For that reason, I would dismiss Mayorga's petition.
To establish standing Mayorga must show: (1) an injury in fact, (2) a causal connection between the injury and the conduct complained of, and (3) a likelihood that the injury will be redressed by a favorable decision. See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992). "To have standing at the appellate stage . . . a litigant must demonstrate 'injury caused by the judgment rather than injury caused by the underlying facts.'" Tachiona v. United States, 386 F.3d 205, 211 (2d Cir. 2004) (quoting 15A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Edward H. Cooper, Federal Practice and Procedure § 3902, at 63 (2d ed. 1992)). Thus, Mayorga must show that the removal order caused the lifetime ban of which he complains.
Although the Immigration Judge (IJ) ordered Mayorga's removal from the United States, the lifetime ban was not at issue before the IJ nor the BIA. Although it is true that an IJ's holding that an alien committed a CIMT could result in a lifetime ban, that is only so when collateral estoppel applies to the holding. Absent the collateral estoppel effect of a CIMT determination, causation is lacking.
In this case, the IJ's determination that Mayorga committed a CIMT has no collateral estoppel effect, as the Government rightly conceded at oral argument.1  If, after his ten-year ban expires, Mayorga wishes to seek reentry into the United States, the IJ's CIMT determination would play no role in the agency's analysis.2  Accordingly,  that determination did not cause his stated injury, a lifetime ban, so he lacks standing to petition this Court to review it.
The standing requirement is not an idle formality, as the procedural history of Mayorga's case demonstrates. By requiring litigants to demonstrate injury in fact, causation, and redressability, courts are protected from adjudicating issues that are not subject to vigorous, adversarial presentations that inform our judgments. See Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186, 204, 82 S. Ct. 691, 7 L. Ed. 2d 663 (1962). As I shall briefly describe, as it relates to the CIMT issue, Mayorga's case was the antithesis of the vigorous, adversarial presentation we typically see.
The parties gave the CIMT issue short shrift before the IJ. At one hearing, the Government was wholly unprepared to litigate the CIMT charge—arguing that the wrong crime was a CIMT until the IJ cut the lawyer off. At the next hearing, the Government gave a nine-sentence argument, relying only on an unnamed, unpublished decision of the BIA. Unbeknownst to the Government, the Seventh Circuit had already reversed the BIA in that case. See Ali v. Mukasey, 521 F.3d 737, 739-40 (7th Cir. 2008). Mayorga never countered the Government's hollow argument. Even worse, at a prior hearing, Mayorga actually conceded that he had been convicted of a CIMT (an admission the IJ declined to accept). On this remarkably sparse record, the IJ held that Mayorga's firearms crime was a CIMT. Only three paragraphs in the IJ's fourteen-page decision discussed the CIMT issue, and its analysis adopts word-for-word the reasoning of the opinion of the BIA that was reversed by the Seventh Circuit in Ali.
Following Mayorga's appeal of the IJ's removal order, the BIA said nothing about whether it agreed with the IJ's CIMT analysis; it merely noted that determination in passing. This was no oversight by the BIA, since neither Mayorga's brief nor the Government's brief discussed the CIMT issue.3 
After losing his appeal to the BIA, Mayorga filed a petition for review with this Court. In motions practice before us, Mayorga referenced various arguments, but never asked us to review the CIMT issue. Instead, the motions panel noticed the IJ's dubious CIMT reasoning and the Seventh Circuit's reversal of the case upon which the IJ had relied.4  At the same time, the motions panel recognized that the CIMT issue might not be justiciable, so we requested briefing on both the CIMT issue and its justiciability. Mayorga briefed both issues, but the Government demurred on the merits of the CIMT question, instead arguing that Mayorga's petition was not justiciable, and if it were, remand to the agency would be appropriate.
 The Government's demurrer to our order is unsurprising since it never asked the agency to impose a lifetime ban upon Mayorga. Rather, it simply sought his removal from the United States. Once Mayorga conceded his unlawful presence in the United States and that he had been incarcerated for more than six months, the Government achieved its objective and it had no reason to press the CIMT issue.
For the reasons stated, I respectfully dissent.

 

