, dissenting.
Because I agree with neither the Majority's conclusion nor the path it took to get there, I must respectfully dissent. I write separately to reiterate my view that we should interpret the United States Sentencing Guidelines (USSG) according to their plain language without adding extra-textual "tests."
Based in part on a two-level enhancement for abuse of a position of trust under § 3B1.3 of the Guidelines, the District Court treated Douglas's offense level as 43 because its initial calculation (44) was so high that it was literally "off the charts." Douglas's crime was so severe that, despite the fact that this was his first offense, the Guidelines suggested a sentence of life imprisonment. Had the District Court disagreed with the Probation Office's recommendation that § 3B1.3 applied to Douglas, his offense level would  have been 42, yielding a Guidelines range of 360 months to life.
As the Majority acknowledges, the District Court sentenced Douglas to 240 months in prison, which was a considerable downward variance. Is there any reason to believe that Douglas's sentence would have been different had the District Court denied the enhancement and fixed Douglas's Guidelines range at 360 months to life? I think not. After the initial sentencing proceeding, review by a panel of this Court, consideration of the appeal by the Court sitting en banc, and a second round of sentencing by the District Court, I expect the matter to end up right where it started: with a 240-month sentence. See, e.g., United States v. Zabielski, 711 F.3d 381, 388-89 (3d Cir. 2013) (erroneous application of enhancement was harmless where "there [wa]s a high probability that it would have imposed the same sentence irrespective of the . . . enhancement").
Although I am not convinced that the transcript of Douglas's sentencing hearing reflects the same sort of "detailed findings of fact and explanation" that justified our application of the harmless-error doctrine in Zabielski, see id., it's hard to imagine why the District Court would, after giving Douglas such a substantial downward variance, conclude on remand that an even greater variance is appropriate simply because Douglas did not exercise professional or managerial discretion. Regardless of whether Douglas was a "fiduciary," a "professional," or a "manager," the fact remains that he had a security clearance that gave him special access to sensitive locations at an international airport, which he abused in order to facilitate large-scale drug trafficking to the great detriment of the public. In my view, this satisfies § 3B1.3.
Although I agree with the result she reaches, I cannot join Judge Shwartz's thoughtful dissent because I do not agree that the factors we established in United States v. Pardo, 25 F.3d 1187 (3d Cir. 1994), are worth retaining. Hearing this case en banc gave us an opportunity to scuttle this test, which strays far from the text of § 3B1.3. Compare USSG § 3B1.3 (enhancement applies "[i]f the defendant abused a position of public or private trust . . . in a manner that significantly facilitated the commission or concealment of the offense"), with Pardo, 25 F.3d at 1192 ("[c]ulling . . . from our cases" the following factors: "(1) whether the position allows the defendant to commit a difficult-to-detect wrong; (2) the degree of authority which the position vests in defendant vis-a-vis the object of the wrongful act; and (3) whether there has been reliance on the integrity of the person occupying the position," to be "considered in light of the guiding rationale of the section—to punish 'insiders' who abuse their positions rather than those who take advantage of an available opportunity").
In seeking to refine the Pardo test, the Majority adds even more extra-textual requirements to what was already an unnecessarily prolix framework. This new iteration divides the § 3B1.3 inquiry into a "preliminary, status-focused question of whether a defendant held a position of public or private trust," which then "ask[s] whether the defendant had the power to make decisions substantially free from supervision based on (1) a fiduciary or fiduciary-like relationship, or (2) an authoritative status that would lead his actions or judgment to be presumptively accepted." Id. at 14-15. If this new set of prerequisites is satisfied, it is then capped off by a Pardo analysis, which requires an examination of how the crime was committed. I recommend we eschew this schema in favor of one relevant question: did the District Court err in concluding that Douglas  abused a position of public trust? See USSG § 3B1.3.
I agree with the Majority that the Guidelines commentary is entitled to "controlling weight." Stinson v. United States, 508 U.S. 36, 45, 113 S. Ct. 1913, 123 L. Ed. 2d 598 (1993) (quoting Bowles v. Seminole Rock & Sand Co., 325 U.S. 410, 414, 65 S. Ct. 1215, 89 L. Ed. 1700 (1945)). But Judge Shwartz is correct that the relevant application note, which explains that a position of trust is "characterized by professional or managerial discretion (i.e., substantial discretionary judgment that is ordinarily given considerable deference)," does not foreclose the application of the § 3B1.3 enhancement to Douglas even though he did not exercise the discretion of a "manager" or "professional." Shwartz Dissent at 1 (quoting USSG § 3B1.3 cmt. n.1). The phrase "characterized by," along with the use of "i.e.," confirms that such discretion is merely "typical or characteristic of" a position of trust rather than a necessary component. See Characterize 2, Oxford English Dictionary (2017); see, e.g., United States v. Thomas, 315 F.3d 190, 204 (3d Cir. 2002) (applying § 3B1.3 enhancement to a non-manager), abrogated on other grounds by Loughrin v. United States, 134 S. Ct. 2384, 189 L. Ed. 2d 411 (2014). In light of his ability to bypass airport security and go "almost everywhere" in and around sensitive areas of the terminal during his overnight shift, App. 140-42, Douglas was hardly an "ordinary bank teller or hotel clerk." USSG § 3B1.3 cmt. n.1.
In sum, I would discard the Pardo test and review the District Court's analysis by applying the text of § 3B1.3, as informed by its application notes, without further embellishments. Accordingly, I would affirm the District Court's judgment sentencing Douglas to 240 months' imprisonment, not only because its application of the § 3B1.3 enhancement was legally sound, but also because the absence of that enhancement—which would have yielded an advisory Guidelines range of 360 months to life—should not affect what was already a very substantial downward variance.
Despite the additional discretion the Supreme Court granted to district judges in United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220, 125 S. Ct. 738, 160 L. Ed. 2d 621 (2005), our sentencing review has become increasingly formalistic: the district court applies an enhancement, the defendant appeals on procedural reasonableness grounds, and this Court spills much ink exploring the finer points of the enhancement instead of evaluating the more meaningful sentencing factors stated in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a). I fear that we are losing the forest for the trees—and this case is a prime example of the problem. With respect, I dissent.
SHWARTZ