, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
I agree with my colleagues that the District Court did not err when it denied Williams's motion to suppress evidence. I also agree that Williams is—as the District Court found—a career offender under § 4B1.1 of the United States Sentencing Guidelines (2015) (USSG). As to that second issue, I concur in the judgment only because I cannot subscribe to the Majority's modified categorical approach, which I  believe misapplies the Supreme Court's decisions in Taylor v. United States, 495 U.S. 575, 110 S. Ct. 2143, 109 L. Ed. 2d 607 (1990), and Mathis v. United States, 136 S. Ct. 2243, 195 L. Ed. 2d 604 (2016). But because a proper application of the modified categorical approach would yield absurd results in cases involving RICO predicate offenses, I am convinced that the Supreme Court would not apply it here. Accordingly, I agree with my colleagues that Williams is a career offender.
At the outset, it's important to note that the Supreme Court has not yet applied Taylor (or Mathis) in a case involving a RICO predicate offense. And although some of our sister courts have adjudicated cases involving the interplay between RICO and the § 4B1.1 career offender guideline, they have not settled on a consistent mode of analysis. For example, the Ninth Circuit placed "the focus of the inquiry . . . on the conduct for which [the defendant] was convicted" without mentioning the categorical approach or citing Taylor. United States v. Scott, 642 F.3d 791, 801 (9th Cir. 2011) (per curiam). The First Circuit has taken a different tack, explaining that in determining whether a RICO conviction counts toward the career offender enhancement, courts should "in fidelity to Taylor principles . . . merely assess the nature and object of the racketeering activity as described in the indictment and fleshed out in the jury instructions." United States v. Winter, 22 F.3d 15, 19-21 (1st Cir. 1994). Like the First Circuit, a panel of the Eleventh Circuit professed fealty to Taylor, but it looked to "the facts to which [the defendant] stipulated" in comparing the conduct underlying the defendant's prior racketeering conviction with the definition of a "controlled substance offense" under USSG § 4B1.2(b). United States v. Rosquete, 208 F. App'x 737, 739-41 (11th Cir. 2006) (per curiam).
Here, my colleagues have chosen to follow the path marked by the Supreme Court in Taylor and Mathis. And if the Taylor/Mathis framework applies to this case, the Majority is quite right that the relevant statute (18 U.S.C. § 1962(c)) is divisible, which requires application of the modified categorical approach.
But the modified categorical approach yields a result contrary to the one the Majority reaches. Section 1961(1)(D), which specifies the type of racketeering activity Williams was engaged in, is not "categorically a subset of the Guidelines' definition of a 'controlled substance offense.'" Maj. Op. 19. Under Guidelines § 4B1.2(b), a "controlled substance offense" encompasses "the manufacture, import, export, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance (or a counterfeit substance) or the possession of a controlled substance (or a counterfeit substance) with intent to manufacture, import, export, distribute, or dispense." That definition differs from Williams's RICO conviction, which involved "the felonious manufacture, importation, receiving, concealment, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in a controlled substance or listed chemical (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act), punishable under any law of the United States." 18 U.S.C. § 1961(1)(D). A comparison of the two provisions makes clear that Williams's RICO offense encompasses conduct that § 4B1.2(b) does not cover, such as "receiving, concealment, buying . . . or otherwise dealing in a controlled substance." See id. Because it "sweeps more broadly than the generic crime," Williams's RICO conviction is not a qualifying offense under the modified categorical approach. See Descamps v. United States, 570 U.S. 254, 261, 133 S. Ct. 2276, 186 L. Ed. 2d 438 (2013).
Would the Supreme Court really conclude that Williams's RICO conviction did  not constitute a "controlled substance offense"? I think not. The predicate acts underlying Williams's conviction included the distribution of and possession with intent to distribute: (1) in excess of a kilogram of heroin; (2) in excess of 50 grams of cocaine base; (3) in excess of 5 grams of cocaine base; (4) less than 5 grams of cocaine base; and (5) less than 100 grams of heroin. The enumeration of these predicate acts plainly establishes that Williams's RICO conviction is for a controlled substance offense.
To hold that it is not defies common sense not only in this case, but in any RICO case predicated on federal drug crimes. This is so because in every such case the "element" that Taylor and Mathis require us to compare to USSG § 4B1.2(b) will be the same: 18 U.S.C. § 1961(1)(D). See Maj. Op. 18-19. An application of the modified categorical approach will thus generate the same nonsensical answer—that a RICO conviction based on controlled substance offenses is not a "controlled substance offense"—every time.
I cannot accept that Congress, the United States Sentencing Commission, or the Supreme Court would endorse such an absurd result. Accordingly, I would hold that the approach the Court has articulated in cases like Taylor, Descamps, and Mathis does not apply here. The categorical approach was developed to ensure that federal defendants who have committed essentially the same crimes in the past don't receive disparate sentences merely because they committed those prior offenses in different states. See Taylor, 495 U.S. at 591-92. That policy justification has no relevance here, where the nature of the prior federal conviction is clear on the face of the docket.
Were the Supreme Court confronted with the question before us, I think it would not attempt to pound the square peg of RICO into the round hole of the categorical/modified categorical approach. It would be especially surprising for the Court to do so not only because the predicate offense at issue here is markedly different from the state burglary crimes at issue in Taylor and Mathis, but also because several Justices have expressed dissatisfaction with the categorical approach generally.1  For these reasons, I would not apply the categorical approach of Taylor and Mathis to the RICO offense at issue here. Instead, I would hold that Williams's RICO conviction was, on its face, a controlled substance offense that counted toward the USSG § 4B1.1 career offender enhancement.
* * *
For the reasons stated, I join the Court's opinion regarding the denial of Williams's motion to suppress, and I concur in the Court's judgment that Williams is a career offender.
ROTH, J., Concurring
Although I agree with the reasoning and the conclusions of the majority opinion,  which I in fact wrote, I write separately because of my concern that the categorical approach, along with its offspring, the modified categorical approach, is pushing us into a catechism of inquiry that renders these approaches ludicrous. The categorical approach was developed to avoid the "practical difficulties and potential unfairness" inherent in "determining the precise facts underlying a defendant's conviction when those facts are not plain from the elements of the offense itself."1 
Given the unique structure of RICO, we are able to determine easily what predicate offenses led to the RICO conviction. There is no possibility of lack of precision. RICO's cross-referential and multi-layered structure makes it unlike other criminal statutes. Williams pleaded guilty to a RICO violation under 18 U.S.C. § 1962(c). Section 1962(c) proscribes participating in the conduct of an interstate enterprise's affairs through a "pattern of racketeering activity," which RICO defines as "at least two acts of racketeering activity."2  Thus, as we recently recognized, in order to a make out a § 1962(c) RICO violation, the government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant himself engaged in at least two predicate acts of racketeering.3  Because a guilty plea requires a defendant to admit to every element of the offense, a defendant pleading to a RICO violation must therefore admit to at least two predicate acts. The mere showing of any two predicate acts of racketeering alone, however, is not enough to sustain a 1962(c) RICO conviction. The law requires a jury to unanimously agree on the specific racketeering acts committed by the defendant and to find all the elements of those predicate acts.4  By the terms of the statute, the two predicate racketeering acts are inextricably linked to the substantive § 1962(c) violation, and a RICO conviction cannot stand without them.
In this situation, I see no need to determine whether § 1962(c) is a divisible statute; I see no need to discuss the alternative forms of conduct covered by it; I see no need to decode the offense of conviction or to ask whether it sweeps more broadly than the relevant generic offense.
Instead, I should be able to look at the RICO conviction and the integrated predicate acts. The predicate acts here are drug offenses, violations of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1) and 846, both controlled substance offenses. Voila, we can ascertain the precise facts underlying the defendant's conviction. The contortions of the modified categorical approach are needless.
I write separately to explain this approach with the hope a future panel may see that there is no need, in the case of a RICO conviction, to engage in the catechism of the modified categorical approach.
FISHER