
This appeal requires us to decide whether several voters and organizations have standing to challenge a law that governs the order in which candidates appear on the ballot in Florida's general elections. The law provides that candidates of the party that won the last gubernatorial election shall appear first for each office on the ballot and that candidates of the second-place party shall appear second. Several Democratic voters and organizations sued the Florida Secretary of State to enjoin enforcement of the law. They alleged that the law violates their rights under the First and Fourteenth Amendments because  candidates who appear first on the ballot—in recent years, Republicans—enjoy a "windfall vote" from a small number of voters who select the first candidate on a ballot solely because of that candidate's position of primacy. After a bench trial, the district court permanently enjoined the Secretary—and the 67 county Supervisors of Elections, none of whom were made parties to this lawsuit—from preparing ballots in accordance with the law.
We hold that the voters and organizations lack standing to sue the Secretary. None of them proved an injury in fact. And any injury they might suffer is neither fairly traceable to the Secretary nor redressable by a judgment against her because she does not enforce the challenged law. Instead, the Supervisors—county officials independent of the Secretary—are responsible for placing candidates on the ballot in the order the law prescribes. The district court lacked authority to enjoin those officials in this suit, so it was powerless to provide redress. Because the voters and organizations lack standing, we vacate and remand with instructions to dismiss for lack of justiciability.
 I. BACKGROUND
As part of a comprehensive revision to the election code, the Florida Legislature enacted a statute in 1951 that governs the order in which candidates appear on the ballot in general elections. 1951 Fla. Laws 871 (originally codified at Fla. Stat. § 101.151(4) (1951)). The statute requires the candidate of the party that won the last gubernatorial election to appear first beneath each office listed on the ballot, with the candidate of the second-place party appearing second. Fla. Stat. § 101.151(3)(a). In the nearly 70 years since its enactment, the statute has placed Democrats first on the ballot in 20 general elections and Republicans first in 14, including the 10 most recent general elections.
In 2018, three voters and six organizations that support the Democratic Party filed a complaint against the Florida Secretary of State to enjoin enforcement of the statute. They alleged that, because of "position bias," the statute confers "an unfair electoral advantage" on Republicans, who have held the Governorship for the past 20 years and whose candidates have appeared first on the ballot during that time. Position bias, or the "primacy effect," refers to the phenomenon that a small number of voters select the candidate who is listed first for an office on the ballot solely because of the candidate's position. In close elections, the complaint alleged, the primacy effect can give Republican candidates the "bump" needed to secure victory. By awarding the benefits of the primacy effect entirely to Republican candidates in recent years, the voters and organizations argued that the statute violates their rights under the First and Fourteenth Amendments as interpreted in Anderson v. Celebrezze, 460 U.S. 780, 103 S. Ct. 1564, 75 L. Ed. 2d 547 (1983), and Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U.S. 428, 112 S. Ct. 2059, 119 L. Ed. 2d 245 (1992).
Shortly after the voters and organizations filed their complaint, the National Republican Senatorial Committee and Republican Governors Association moved to intervene as defendants. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 24(b). The district court granted the motion. The Republican intervenors joined the Secretary in defending the challenged law as constitutional and opposing the relief the voters and organizations sought.
At a bench trial, the voters and organizations presented the testimony of three expert witnesses. Jon Krosnick, a professor at Stanford University, reviewed the academic literature and testified that the existence of the primacy effect is well-established  by academic studies of elections. Based on his regression analyses of past Florida elections, Krosnick testified that candidates listed first on Florida ballots have historically gained an average advantage of about five percentage points. Jonathan Rodden, also a professor at Stanford University, testified about the primacy effect in down-ballot races. Rodden testified that the primacy effect is more pronounced in down-ballot races, where voters often have less information about the candidates, than in top-of-ticket races. And Paul Herrnson, a professor at the University of Connecticut, testified about how ballot order contributes to "proximity error." Herrnson testified that when voters make proximity errors—that is, accidentally select the candidate listed before or after the one they mean to select—the second-listed candidate is especially disadvantaged in races with more than two candidates. The reason for this disadvantage, Herrnson explained, is that voters who intend to select the first or last candidate in a list can err in only one direction, but voters who intend to select the second candidate can err in either direction.
The Secretary and the Republican intervenors presented the testimony of an expert witness, several election officials, and a corporate representative for one of Florida's election machine vendors. Michael Barber, a professor at Brigham Young University, critiqued Krosnick's methods and testified that Krosnick's estimate of an average five-percent primacy effect was not valid. Maria Matthews, Director of the Florida Division of Elections, and several county Supervisors of Elections testified about the state interests the challenged law serves. They explained that the statute helps prevent voter confusion, allows voters to more quickly find their preferred candidate or party for a particular office, promotes uniformity in administering elections across Florida's 67 counties and over 6,000 precincts, and helps limit errors in ballot layout. Matthews and the Supervisors also testified about the logistical difficulties of implementing the voters' and organizations' requested relief, such as rotating the names of Democratic and Republican candidates between counties or between voting precincts within a county. And a corporate representative for an election machine vendor testified that he did not know whether the election machines could rotate Democratic and Republican candidates between the top two ballot positions and that it could take up to a year for the company to take the steps necessary for rotating candidate names.
After trial, the district court entered a final order. It rejected the Secretary's and intervenors' arguments that the lawsuit presented a nonjusticiable political question and that the voters and organizations lacked standing. And on the merits, it ruled that Florida's method of ordering candidates on the ballot is unconstitutional.
The district court ruled that both the voters and the organizations proved Article III standing. It reasoned that an "impact on the right to vote" is "common to all election laws," so the voters necessarily had an injury in fact. It also concluded that the organizations were injured because they spent resources to combat the primacy effect and because some unidentified voters who were members of the organizations would be harmed by the primacy effect. The district court did not squarely address whether any injury from ballot order is traceable to the Secretary, but it reasoned that the Secretary is responsible for ballot order because she is Florida's "chief election officer." And although Florida law tasks the nonparty Supervisors with placing candidates on the ballot in the correct order, Fla. Stat. § 99.121, the district court ruled that relief against the  Secretary could redress the voters' and organizations' injuries.
On the merits, the district court ruled that the law is unconstitutional under the approach established in Anderson, which requires courts to weigh the burdens imposed by an election regulation against the state interests justifying the measure. See 460 U.S. at 789. The district court found that "candidates of the major parties in Florida receive an average primacy effect vote of approximately five percent when listed first in their office block on the ballot." And based on "Florida's history of election results in which the margin of victory or defeat is less than three to five percentage points," the district court found that the ballot statute "has impacted Plaintiffs' First and Fourteenth Amendment rights by systematically allocating that small but statistically significant advantage to Republican candidates" in recent years. It concluded the statute was "politically discriminatory" because it awarded the benefits of the primacy effect to a single political party in any given election. And it found that the state's asserted justifications for the statute—upholding the legislature's policy choice, preventing voter confusion, promoting uniformity, and promoting voter confidence in the election administration process—were "weak," "not particularly persuasive," and "not particularly strong on the specific facts of this case."
The district court awarded declaratory and injunctive relief. It declared that Florida's ballot-order scheme violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments. And it permanently enjoined the Secretary and the 67 Supervisors of Elections from implementing the ballot-order statute. Based on the Secretary's "responsibility for general supervision and administration of the election laws," the district court ordered the Secretary to neither "enforce, nor permit enforcement of," the statute. The district court also ordered the Secretary to "take all practicable measures within the scope of [her] official authority to ensure compliance with the terms of [its] Order." And it enjoined any "supervisor of elections of any Florida county"—none of whom were named as defendants or served with process as parties to this lawsuit—from issuing "any ballot which is organized pursuant to" the statute. The district court also ordered the Secretary to "provide written guidance to the supervisors of elections of Florida's counties informing them that this Court has declared the [statute] unconstitutional" and to "include a true and correct copy of this Court's order in her written guidance."
The district court did not require Florida to adopt a specific alternative method of ordering candidates on ballots; it instead explained that two kinds of alternative schemes would be constitutional and allowed Florida to choose an alternative scheme. The first group of permissible schemes it identified were "rotational schemes," which "rotate candidates' names within their office blocks on a county-by-county or precinct-by-precinct basis." The district court explained that these schemes "equaliz[e] the burden on voting rights" by "distributing the candidate name order effects more evenly across all candidates." The second group of permissible schemes the district court identified are those that "cleans[e] the partisan taint from the process," such as ordering candidates alphabetically by last name, by the order in which they submit their qualifying paperwork, or by lottery.
 II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review questions of subject-matter jurisdiction de novo. United States v. Pavlenko, 921 F.3d 1286, 1289 (11th Cir. 2019).
  III. DISCUSSION
Federal courts have an independent obligation to ensure that subject-matter jurisdiction exists before reaching the merits of a dispute. "For a court to pronounce upon . . . the constitutionality of a state or federal law when it has no jurisdiction to do so is, by very definition, for a court to act ultra vires." Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env't, 523 U.S. 83, 101-02, 118 S. Ct. 1003, 140 L. Ed. 2d 210 (1998). If at any point a federal court discovers a lack of jurisdiction, it must dismiss the action. See MSP Recovery, LLC v. Allstate Ins. Co., 835 F.3d 1351, 1357 (11th Cir. 2016).
Unfortunately, the district court took its obligation to ensure its jurisdiction far too lightly. It dismissed weighty challenges to the voters' and organizations' standing under Article III as a "hodgepodge" of "[p]reliminary [m]iscellanea" and proceeded to declare Florida's ballot statute unconstitutional and enter an injunction against both the Secretary and the nonparty Supervisors. In doing so, the district court acted ultra vires by ordering relief that the voters and organizations had no standing to seek.
Article III of the Constitution limits the subject-matter jurisdiction of federal courts to "Cases" and "Controversies." U.S. Const. art. III, § 2. "To have a case or controversy, a litigant must establish that he has standing," which requires proof of three elements. United States v. Amodeo, 916 F.3d 967, 971 (11th Cir. 2019). The litigant must prove (1) an injury in fact that (2) is fairly traceable to the challenged action of the defendant and (3) is likely to be redressed by a favorable decision. Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992).
Because the elements of standing "are not mere pleading requirements but rather an indispensable part of the plaintiff's case, each element must be supported . . . with the manner and degree of evidence required at the successive stages of the litigation." Id. at 561. If an action proceeds to trial, the facts necessary to establish standing "must be supported adequately by the evidence adduced at trial." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). And when plaintiffs seek prospective relief to prevent future injuries, they must prove that their threatened injuries are "certainly impending." Clapper v. Amnesty Int'l USA, 568 U.S. 398, 401, 133 S. Ct. 1138, 185 L. Ed. 2d 264 (2013) (internal quotation marks omitted).
We divide our discussion of why the voters and organizations lack Article III standing in two parts. First, we explain that neither the voters nor the organizations proved an injury in fact. Second, we explain that even if they had proved an injury, that injury would be neither traceable to the Secretary nor redressable by relief against her.
 A. Neither the Voters nor the Organizations Proved an Injury in Fact.
We divide our discussion of injury in two parts. We first explain that the individual voters failed to prove an injury. We then explain that the organizations likewise failed to prove an injury.
1. The Voters Failed to Prove an Injury.
Two of the three voters never testified at trial or in a deposition. The record contains no evidence about any injuries those two individuals suffered in the past or may suffer in the future. Indeed, we do not even know whether they plan to vote in future Florida elections.
When confronted with this lack of evidence, the district court reasoned  that an "impact on the right to vote" is "common to all election laws," so the voters must have standing. But the Supreme Court has made clear that "a person's right to vote is individual and personal in nature," so "voters who allege facts showing disadvantage to themselves as individuals have standing to sue." Gill v. Whitford, 138 S. Ct. 1916, 1929, 201 L. Ed. 2d 313 (2018) (internal quotation marks omitted). And of course, "[t]he facts necessary to establish standing . . . must not only be alleged at the pleading stage, but also proved at trial." Id. at 1931. Because they failed to offer any evidence at trial showing disadvantage to themselves as individuals, these two voters failed to prove an injury.
The only voter who offered any evidence at trial was Nancy Jacobson. Jacobson testified that she "always vote[s]," that she "go[es] out of [her] way to vote in every election," and that she consistently votes for Democratic candidates. But Jacobson failed to identify any difficulty in voting for her preferred candidate or otherwise participating in the political process.
Although her brief is less than clear on this point, Jacobson appears to identify two threatened injuries from the ballot statute. The first is that some unidentified Democratic candidates for whom she will vote in future elections will lose those elections because of the primacy effect. The second injury is that—regardless of the outcome of any election—the ballot statute "dilutes" the votes of Democrats relative to Republicans by allocating the windfall vote entirely to Republican candidates. We reject both theories of injury.
To the extent Jacobson contends that she will be injured if a Democratic candidate for whom she votes loses an election or is at increased risk of losing, we disagree. A candidate's electoral loss does not, by itself, injure those who voted for the candidate. Voters have no judicially enforceable interest in the outcome of an election. See Raines v. Byrd, 521 U.S. 811, 819, 824, 830, 117 S. Ct. 2312, 138 L. Ed. 2d 849 (1997). Instead, they have an interest in their ability to vote and in their vote being given the same weight as any other.
Raines, which involved the standing of legislators to challenge the constitutionality of the Line Item Veto Act, is instructive. Id. at 814, 816. Several legislators who voted against the Act sued to challenge it. Id. at 814. The Supreme Court explained that passage of the Act did not injure the legislators who voted against it because "their votes were given full effect," and the disappointed legislators "simply lost that vote." Id. at 824. The Court made clear that legislators have standing to challenge the defeat or enactment of legislation only if the outcome of the vote changed because their votes were "nullified"—that is, not counted at all. Id. at 823 & n.6. Jacobson does not argue that the ballot statute nullifies her vote. Instead, her complaint is that less careful voters will vote for Republican candidates solely because they appear first on the ballot, which might cause her preferred candidates to lose. Like the legislators in Raines, the first harm she identifies is an unfavorable electoral outcome, wholly apart from any allegation of vote dilution or nullification.
Although the voting rights of legislators and citizens are not identical, see Nev. Comm'n on Ethics v. Carrigan, 564 U.S. 117, 126, 131 S. Ct. 2343, 180 L. Ed. 2d 150 (2011), we conclude that absent any evidence of vote dilution or nullification, a citizen is not injured by the simple fact that a candidate for whom she votes loses or stands to lose an election. And two of our sister circuits agree. See Berg v. Obama, 586 F.3d 234, 240 (3d Cir. 2009)  ("Berg's wish that the Democratic primary voters had chosen a different presidential candidate . . . do[es] not state a legal harm."); Becker v. Fed. Election Comm'n, 230 F.3d 381, 390 (1st Cir. 2000) (holding that a candidate's decreased "chance of being elected" was "hardly a restriction on voters' rights and by itself [was] not a legally cognizable injury sufficient for standing"). Jacobson's first alleged injury is legally insufficient to establish Article III standing.
Insofar as Jacobson argues that the ballot statute will injure her by diluting her vote relative to the votes of Republicans, she failed to prove any such injury. Her theory of vote dilution appears to be that, because of Florida's ballot order and the primacy effect, it takes a greater number of careful Democratic voters than careful Republican voters to elect their preferred candidates. The reason for this disparity is that some less careful voters will select Republican candidates solely because they happen to appear first on the ballot, thereby diluting the votes of careful Democratic voters. Even assuming that this kind of "vote dilution" counts as an Article III injury, the evidence Jacobson offered is insufficient to prove it.
In Gill, the Supreme Court addressed whether voters had standing to challenge a partisan gerrymander based on the dilution of their votes. 138 S. Ct. at 1929-31. Partisan gerrymandering operates by placing voters of one party "in legislative districts deliberately designed to 'waste' their votes in elections where their chosen candidates will win in landslides (packing) or are destined to lose by closer margins (cracking)." Id. at 1930. The voters' theory of injury was that the partisan gerrymander caused their votes to "carry less weight" than they would "in another, hypothetical district" that had not been packed or cracked. Id. at 1931. But instead of offering evidence that they lived in a packed or cracked district, which could have shown "disadvantage to themselves as individuals," id. at 1930 (internal quotation marks omitted), the voters rested their case on a "theory of statewide injury to Wisconsin Democrats," id. at 1932.
To prove partisan vote dilution, the voters in Gill relied on an "average measure" of "partisan asymmetry" that compared the "statewide sum of one party's wasted votes" to "the statewide sum of the other party's wasted votes." Id. at 1933. The Supreme Court held that this average measure of the partisan effects of a gerrymander was insufficient to establish the voters' standing because it did not "address the effect that a gerrymander has on the votes of particular citizens." Id. It instead "measure[d] something else entirely: the effect that a gerrymander has on the fortunes of political parties." Id.
Jacobson similarly relies on a statewide average measure of the primacy effect in Florida elections to prove the injury of partisan vote dilution. Her experts testified, and the district court found, that candidates who appear first on the ballot in Florida receive an average primacy effect vote of about five percent. But the experts acknowledged that this average measure tells us nothing about the existence or size of the primacy effect in any given election. Dr. Krosnick agreed that his analysis did not "mean that every Republican candidate receive[s] a [five] percent advantage by being listed first." As he explained, the primacy effect will be larger in some races and smaller in others. Indeed, because Jacobson relies solely on an average measure of the primacy effect, we cannot know how often the primacy effect is zero and how often it is much greater than five percent. Any estimates we might make about the variance in the primacy effect across races would be pure speculation.
 As in Gill, the average measure of partisan advantage on which Jacobson relies is insufficient to prove that her individual vote will be diluted. "We need not doubt [Jacobson's] math" to reach this conclusion. Id. The reason her calculations cannot establish standing is that they "are an average measure." Id. "They do not address the effect" that ballot order and the primacy effect have "on the votes of particular citizens" in any given election. Id. (emphasis added). Instead, like the average measures at issue in Gill, Jacobson's calculations "measure something else entirely: the effect that [ballot order and the primacy effect have] on the fortunes of political parties" across many elections. Id. And complaints about that effect are based on nothing more than "generalized partisan preferences," which federal courts are "not responsible for vindicating." Id.
Much like the average measure of wasted votes in Gill, the average measure of the primacy effect treats all elections "as indistinguishable, even though their individual situations are quite different." Id. In low-information races between Democrats and Republicans, the primacy effect may be quite pronounced. But in an especially competitive, high-information race, the primacy effect may be negligible or nonexistent. Likewise, some races in noncompetitive districts may have no Republican candidates on the ballot at all and, hence, no primacy effect. An average measure of the primacy effect across all elections cannot tell us whether ballot order has diluted or will dilute Jacobson's or any other citizen's vote in any particular election. See id. (explaining that statewide average measures of partisan advantage were incapable of distinguishing between the effects of a gerrymander on one citizen as opposed to another).
Jacobson and the other voters failed to prove that they have suffered or will suffer partisan vote dilution in any particular election. As in Gill, this lawsuit presents a dispute "about group political interests, not individual legal rights." Id. The "generalized partisan preferences" on which the voters rely cannot provide an injury in fact sufficient for Article III standing. Id.
2. The Organizations Failed to Prove an Injury.
For their part, the organizations rely on two theories of injury. They seek to establish associational standing based on the injuries of their members, see Summers v. Earth Island Inst., 555 U.S. 488, 494, 129 S. Ct. 1142, 173 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2009), and organizational standing based on their own injuries, see Common Cause/Ga. v. Billups, 554 F.3d 1340, 1350-51 (11th Cir. 2009). But they failed to prove an injury under either theory.
To establish associational standing, an organization must prove that its members "would otherwise have standing to sue in their own right." Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Envtl. Servs. (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 181, 120 S. Ct. 693, 145 L. Ed. 2d 610 (2000). The organizations contend that they have standing based on injuries suffered by Democratic voters and candidates who are their members. But five of the six organizations failed to even allege, much less prove, that they have any members—voters or candidates. That failure is fatal to their associational standing. See Summers, 555 U.S. at 498.
The only organization that describes itself as having members is the Democratic National Committee, but it failed to identify any of its members, much less one who will be injured by the ballot statute. See id. (requiring organizations to establish "that at least one identified member" will suffer an injury); see also Ga. Republican Party v. Sec. & Exch.  Comm'n, 888 F.3d 1198, 1203-04 (11th Cir. 2018). And even if we accept as true the allegation of the complaint that the Committee's members include Democratic voters and candidates in Florida, the Committee still has not proved that one of those unidentified members will suffer an injury.
Any voters and candidates in Florida face the same problem as Jacobson. That is, because the Committee relies solely on an average measure of the primacy effect, we have no basis to conclude that the primacy effect will impact any particular voter or candidate in any particular election. Cf. Summers, 555 U.S. at 497 (rejecting the argument that an organization could establish standing if there was "a statistical probability that some of [its] members are threatened with concrete injury"). And the Committee has not proved that at least one of its unidentified members "is certain to be injured by" the primacy effect. Ga. Republican Party, 888 F.3d at 1204.
The organizations argue that they have suffered an injury in their own right by diverting resources to combat the effects of the ballot statute. In Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, the Supreme Court held that an organization could establish standing to sue under the Fair Housing Act if it alleged, and later proved, that the challenged actions of the defendants drained its resources and thereby impaired its other operations. 455 U.S. 363, 378-79, 102 S. Ct. 1114, 71 L. Ed. 2d 214 & n.21 (1982). The housing organization in Havens Realty alleged that the defendants' discriminatory renting practices required it "to devote significant resources to identify and counteract" those practices, which "perceptibly impaired" the organization's "ability to provide counseling and referral services for low-and moderate-income homeseekers." Id. at 379 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Court concluded that these allegations were sufficient to establish standing at the pleading stage, but it warned that at trial the organization would have to prove "that it has indeed suffered impairment in its role of facilitating open housing before it will be entitled to judicial relief." Id. at 379 & n.21. Because statutory standing under the Fair Housing Act "extend[s] to the full limits" of standing under Article III of the Constitution, id. at 372, we have applied the reasoning of Havens Realty to determine whether an organization has Article III standing based on the diversion of its resources. See, e.g., Fla. State Conference of NAACP v. Browning, 522 F.3d 1153, 1165 & n.14 (11th Cir. 2008).
Consistent with Havens Realty, our precedent holds that "an organization has standing to sue on its own behalf if the defendant's illegal acts impair its ability to engage in its projects by forcing the organization to divert resources to counteract those illegal acts." Id. at 1165. In Browning, we ruled that the NAACP and another organization had standing to challenge a voting requirement because the organizations would "divert personnel and time" from other activities "to educating volunteers and voters on compliance with" the requirement. Id. at 1166. In a later decision, we held that the NAACP had standing to challenge a law that required voters to present photo identification because the organization was "actively involved in voting activities and would divert resources from its regular activities to educate and assist voters in complying with" the law. Common Cause/Ga., 554 F.3d at 1350.
To establish resource diversion, the organizations cite the testimony of Daniel Kazin, the director of campaigns for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. When asked why he believed the  ballot statute harms the Committee, Kazin responded that "[b]ecause of the primacy effect, we need to spend additional resources in the target districts that we have." The organizations also rely on similar testimony from Guy Cecil, the chair of Priorities USA, who testified that the organization had to "invest more resources into [Florida] in order to compensate for" the primacy effect.
Although resource diversion is a concrete injury, neither Kazin nor Cecil explained what activities the Committee or Priorities USA would divert resources away from in order to spend additional resources on combatting the primacy effect, as precedent requires. See Havens Realty, 455 U.S. at 379 n.21; see also Browning, 522 F.3d at 1166 ("These resources would otherwise be spent on registration drives and election-day education and monitoring."); Common Cause/Ga., 554 F.3d at 1350 (explaining that resources would be diverted "from 'getting voters to the polls' to helping them obtain acceptable photo identification" (alteration adopted)); Ga. Latino All. for Human Rights v. Governor of Ga., 691 F.3d 1250, 1260 (11th Cir. 2012) (observing that an immigration organization "cancelled citizenship classes to focus on" increased inquiries about a new law). Based on Kazin's testimony, we do not know what activities, if any, might be impaired by the Committee's decision to allocate "additional resources" to target districts because of the primacy effect. And Cecil's testimony likewise fails to identify any activities that will be impaired by Priorities USA's decision to "invest more resources" into Florida. Their testimony fails to establish an injury based on diversion of resources.
The organizations also contend that the ballot statute injures them by harming their mission of electing Democrats, but that harm is not a cognizable injury. An organization's general interest in its preferred candidates winning as many elections as possible is still a "generalized partisan preference[]" that federal courts are "not responsible for vindicating," no less than when individual voters assert an interest in their preferred candidates winning elections. Gill, 138 S. Ct. at 1933; see also id. at 1932 (rejecting a voter's "hope of achieving a Democratic majority in the legislature" as "a collective political interest" that cannot establish standing). Harm to an organization's generalized partisan preferences describes only "a setback to [its] abstract social interests," which is insufficient to establish a concrete injury in fact. Havens Realty, 455 U.S. at 379; see also Arcia v. Fla. Sec'y of State, 772 F.3d 1335, 1342 (11th Cir. 2014) (requiring "a concrete and demonstrable injury, not an abstract social interest" for organizational standing (alteration adopted) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
We need not decide whether a political party would have standing to challenge an electoral practice that harmed one of its candidate's electoral prospects in a particular election. See, e.g., Tex. Democratic Party v. Benkiser, 459 F.3d 582, 586 (5th Cir. 2006) (holding that the Texas Democratic Party had standing to challenge action that would reduce "its congressional candidate's chances of victory" in upcoming election). As discussed, the average measure of partisan advantage on which the organizations rely tells us nothing about whether ballot order has affected or will affect any particular candidate in any particular election. And in any event, the organizations do not argue that a particular candidate's prospects in a future election will be harmed. They instead contend that they have standing based on "systemic disadvantage to [their] party relative to other political parties." Because that kind  of harm from ballot order is based on nothing more than "generalized partisan preferences," it is insufficient to establish standing. Gill, 138 S. Ct. at 1933.
 B. Any Injury from Ballot Order Is Neither Traceable to the Secretary nor Redressable by Relief Against Her.
Even if the voters and organizations had proved an injury in fact, they would still lack standing because any injury would be neither traceable to the Secretary nor redressable by relief against her. Instead, any injury would be traceable only to 67 Supervisors of Elections and redressable only by relief against them. The voters and organizations' failure to join the Supervisors as defendants is an independent reason that they lack standing to maintain this action.
To satisfy the causation requirement of standing, a plaintiff's injury must be "fairly traceable to the challenged action of the defendant, and not the result of the independent action of some third party not before the court." Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560 (alterations adopted) (internal quotation marks omitted). The voters and organizations contend that they are injured because Republicans, not Democrats, appear first on the ballot in Florida's general elections. So for them to have standing, the order in which candidates appear on the ballot must be traceable to the Secretary—the only defendant in this action. The problem for the voters and organizations is that Florida law tasks the Supervisors, independently of the Secretary, with printing the names of candidates on ballots in the order prescribed by the ballot statute. Fla. Stat. § 99.121 ("The names of [candidates] shall be printed by the supervisor of elections upon the ballot in their proper place as provided by law."). The Secretary is responsible only for "certify[ing] to the supervisor of elections of each county . . . the names of persons nominated." Id. The voters and organizations have offered no contrary evidence to establish that the Secretary plays any role in determining the order in which candidates appear on ballots. "Because the [Secretary] didn't do (or fail to do) anything that contributed to [their] harm," the voters and organizations "cannot meet Article III's traceability requirement." Lewis v. Governor of Ala., 944 F.3d 1287, 1301 (11th Cir. 2019) (en banc).
Our conclusion that any injury from ballot order is not traceable to the Secretary rests on the reality that the Supervisors are independent officials under Florida law who are not subject to the Secretary's control. The Supervisors are constitutional officers who are elected at the county level by the people of Florida; they are not appointed by the Secretary. Fla. Const. art. VIII, § 1(d); Fla. Stat. § 98.015(1). The Florida Department of State's organic statute does not list the Supervisors among its divisions, Fla. Stat. § 20.10(2), and the Board of County Commissioners, not the Department, compensates the Supervisors. Id. § 98.015(2). Only the Governor of Florida, not the Secretary, may suspend county officials such as the Supervisors, and only the state senate may remove them from office. Fla. Const. art. IV, § 7; see also, e.g., Fla. Exec. Order No. 19-19 (executive order suspending the Supervisor of Elections for Palm Beach County); Fla. Exec. Order No. 18-342 (executive order suspending the Supervisor of Elections for Broward County). Indeed, the only means of control the Secretary has over the Supervisors is through coercive judicial process: she may bring "actions at law or in equity by mandamus or injunction to enforce the performance of any duties of a county supervisor of elections." Fla. Stat. § 97.012(14). That the Secretary must resort to judicial process if the Supervisors  fail to perform their duties underscores her lack of authority over them. Because the Supervisors are independent officials not subject to the Secretary's control, their actions to implement the ballot statute may not be imputed to the Secretary for purposes of establishing traceability.
Contrary to the reasoning of the district court, the Secretary's position as "the chief election officer of the state," id. § 97.012, with "general supervision and administration of the election laws," id. § 15.13, does not make the order in which candidates appear on the ballot traceable to her. We recently rejected a similar argument en banc. See Lewis, 944 F.3d at 1300. In Lewis, two workers sued the Attorney General of Alabama to challenge a state law that preempted a local ordinance requiring employers to pay higher wages. Id. at 1293-94. We explained that the workers' injury—receiving lower wages because of the state law—was not traceable to the Attorney General because he had never enforced or threatened to enforce the law, and the law itself contemplated no role for the Attorney General. Id. at 1296, 1298-99. And of particular relevance to this appeal, we rejected the workers' reliance upon "a host of provisions of the Alabama Code that generally describe the Attorney General's [enforcement] authority" to establish traceability. Id. at 1300. In the absence of any evidence that the Secretary controls ballot order, the voters and organizations likewise cannot rely on the Secretary's general election authority to establish traceability. See id. at 1298-1300. Florida law expressly gives a different, independent official control over the order in which candidates appear on the ballot. See Fla. Stat. § 99.121.
Because the Secretary will not cause any injury the voters and organizations might suffer, relief against her will not redress that injury—either "directly or indirectly." See Lewis, 944 F.3d at 1301 (internal quotation marks omitted). An injunction ordering the Secretary not to follow the ballot statute's instructions for ordering candidates cannot provide redress, for neither she nor her agents control the order in which candidates appear on the ballot. Nor can declaratory relief against the Secretary directly redress any injury to the voters and organizations. A declaratory judgment against the Secretary does not bind the Supervisors, "who are not parties" to this action. Id. at 1302 (internal quotation marks omitted). As nonparties, the Supervisors are not "obliged . . . in any binding sense . . . to honor an incidental legal determination [this] suit produce[s]." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). They remain lawfully entitled to print candidates' names on the ballot in the order prescribed by Florida law unless and until they are made parties to a judicial proceeding that determines otherwise. See id. at 1302-03.
To be sure, the district court ordered the Secretary to "provide written guidance to the supervisors of elections of Florida's counties informing them that this Court has declared the [statute] unconstitutional" and to include "a true and correct copy of this Court's order in her written guidance." But this "notice" theory of redressability contravenes the "settled principle[]" that "it must be the effect of the court's judgment on the defendant—not an absent third party—that redresses the plaintiff's injury." Id. at 1301 (internal quotation marks omitted). Any persuasive effect a judicial order might have upon the Supervisors, as absent nonparties who are not under the Secretary's control, cannot suffice to establish redressability. See id. at 1305 ("If courts may simply assume that everyone (including those who are not proper parties to an action) will honor the  legal rationales that underlie their decrees, then redressability will always exist." (quoting Franklin v. Massachusetts, 505 U.S. 788, 825, 112 S. Ct. 2767, 120 L. Ed. 2d 636 (1992) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment))). "Redressability requires that the court be able to afford relief through the exercise of its power, not through the persuasive or even awe-inspiring effect of the opinion explaining the exercise of its power." Id. (quoting Franklin, 505 U.S. at 825 (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment)). Because the voters and organizations failed to sue the officials who will cause any future injuries, even the most persuasive of judicial opinions would have been powerless to redress those injuries.
Even if we consider the persuasive effect of the judgment on the nonparty Supervisors, the voters and organizations have not established that redress is likely "as a practical matter." Utah v. Evans, 536 U.S. 452, 461, 122 S. Ct. 2191, 153 L. Ed. 2d 453 (2002). They have not proved that declaratory relief against the Secretary will "significantly increase the likelihood" that the Supervisors will ignore state law and follow a federal decree that does not bind them. Lewis, 944 F.3d at 1301. The Supervisors are obliged under state law to continue printing candidates' names "upon the ballot in their proper place as provided by law" regardless of what a federal court might say in an action that does not involve them. Fla. Stat. § 99.121. The district court's decision rests on the flawed notion that by declaring the ballot statute unconstitutional, it eliminated the legal effect of the statute in all contexts. But "federal courts have no authority to erase a duly enacted law from the statute books." Jonathan F. Mitchell, The Writ-of-Erasure Fallacy, 104 Va. L. Rev. 933, 936 (2018); see also Steffel v. Thompson, 415 U.S. 452, 469, 94 S. Ct. 1209, 39 L. Ed. 2d 505 (1974) ("Of course, a favorable declaratory judgment . . . cannot make even an unconstitutional statute disappear." (internal quotation marks omitted)). Our power is more limited: we may "enjoin executive officials from taking steps to enforce a statute." Mitchell, supra, at 936. And we can exercise that power only when the officials who enforce the challenged statute are properly made parties to a suit.
The district court apparently understood that relief against the Secretary would not redress any injury to the voters and organizations, so it enjoined the Supervisors too. Its injunction stated, "No supervisor of elections of any Florida county . . . shall issue any ballot which is organized pursuant to the [ballot statute]." And its opinion warned the Supervisors against "selectively interpret[ing] parts of" its order "or otherwise avoid[ing] compliance."
The district court exceeded its authority by purporting to enjoin the Supervisors, none of whom have ever been parties to this lawsuit. Although a district court may bind nonparties "who are in active concert" with a defendant, Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(d)(2)(C), that rule applies only when a plaintiff validly invokes federal jurisdiction by satisfying the traceability and redressability requirements of standing against a defendant. See In re Infant Formula Antitrust Litig., 72 F.3d 842, 843 (11th Cir. 1995) ("The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure do not create federal jurisdiction."). If a plaintiff sues the wrong defendant, an order enjoining the correct official who has not been joined as a defendant cannot suddenly make the plaintiff's injury redressable. The district court was without jurisdiction to enjoin the lone defendant in this action, much less the nonparty Supervisors. See Zenith Radio Corp. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 395 U.S. 100, 112,  89 S. Ct. 1562, 23 L. Ed. 2d 129 (1969) (holding that the district court erred when it enjoined a nonparty that was never determined to be in active concert with a defendant).
The district court also relied on an inapposite decision, Democratic Executive Committee of Florida v. Lee, 915 F.3d 1312, 1318 (11th Cir. 2019), to conclude that relief against the Secretary would redress any injury to the voters and organizations. In Lee, a motions panel of this Court ruled that the Florida Secretary of State was a proper defendant under Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123, 28 S. Ct. 441, 52 L. Ed. 714 (1908), in an action challenging an election procedure administered by the county Supervisors of Elections. 915 F.3d at 1316, 1318 (citing Fla. Stat. § 101.68). But Article III standing and the proper defendant under Ex parte Young are "[s]eparate[]" issues, Lewis, 944 F.3d at 1295, and Lee addressed only the latter. To be a proper defendant under Ex parte Young—and so avoid an Eleventh Amendment bar to suit—a state official need only have "some connection" with the enforcement of the challenged law. 209 U.S. at 157. In contrast, Article III standing requires that the plaintiff's injury be "fairly traceable" to the defendant's actions and redressable by relief against that defendant. Lewis, 944 F.3d at 1298, 1301 (internal quotation marks omitted). The district court erred by treating Lee as if it addressed—let alone resolved—the standing issues in this suit.
Because the voters and organizations lack standing to sue the Secretary, we have no occasion to consider whether the Secretary is a proper defendant under Ex parte Young—the only issue Lee addressed. See id. at 1296, 1306. Nor need we decide whether Lee—which was issued by a motions panel instead of a merits panel—is even binding precedent. See Democratic Exec. Comm. of Fla. v. Nat'l Republican Senatorial Comm., 950 F.3d 790, 795 (11th Cir. 2020) (declining to vacate the opinion of the motions panel in Lee after the appeal became moot because "the necessarily tentative and preliminary nature of [the] stay-panel opinion precludes the opinion from having an effect outside that case").
We cannot agree with our colleague's partial dissent that whether the voters and organizations satisfied traceability and redressability are "difficult questions" or that "principles of judicial restraint" counsel against deciding them. Dissenting Op. at 68. The resolution of those issues is straightforward, and the Secretary has repeatedly asked federal courts in our circuit to decide them. And we are unaware of any principle of judicial restraint that counsels against addressing multiple elements of standing, a threshold issue of justiciability. The Supreme Court has decided multiple elements of standing in alternative holdings, see Clapper, 568 U.S. at 401-02 (injury and traceability), and so have we, see, e.g., City of Miami Gardens v. Wells Fargo & Co., 931 F.3d 1274, 1283-84 (11th Cir. 2019) (injury and traceability); Kawa Orthodontics, LLP v. Sec'y, U.S. Dep't of the Treasury, 773 F.3d 243, 245-48 (11th Cir. 2014) (deciding all three elements). There is nothing unusual or untoward about our alternative holdings on traceability and redressability, as the partial dissent argues. See Dissenting Op. at 91-95. To the contrary, they promote judicial economy by resolving issues that have percolated in our circuit for years and are likely to recur in future litigation.
The partial dissent says that the Secretary never advanced in this case the argument we adopt today, id. at 70, 95, but that assertion tells only half the story. As the Secretary mentioned at oral argument,  Oral Argument at 34:40-35:08 (Feb. 12, 2020), her office has repeatedly, if unsuccessfully, argued to the district judge who presided over this litigation that the Secretary has highly limited authority over county election officials, including the Supervisors. See, e.g., Rivera Madera v. Detzner, 325 F. Supp. 3d 1269, 1275 (N.D. Fla. 2018) (Walker, C.J.) (rejecting the Secretary's argument that "he has no relevant power over the county supervisors of elections"); Fla. Democratic Party v. Detzner, No. 4:16-cv-607-MW-CAS, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 143620, 2016 WL 6090943, at *4-5 (N.D. Fla. Oct. 16, 2016) (Walker, J.) (rejecting the Secretary's arguments that "he cannot direct the [county] canvassing boards to comply with any order issued by this Court" and that "he does not possess the power to issue orders [to county officials] directing compliance with Florida's election laws"). The Secretary made clear at oral argument that her office has not changed its position on this issue, even if in this lawsuit she elected not to raise the argument yet again before a district court that had repeatedly rejected the Secretary's own understanding of her authority under state law. Oral Argument at 34:55-35:08 (Feb. 12, 2020) ("[W]e do not think we're the right defendant. We have made this argument on several occasions . . . and, quite frankly, in the Northern District of Florida we have not succeeded . . . ."). So our ruling today is consistent with the Secretary's longstanding view about the scope of her powers.
The partial dissent next contends that the Secretary's authority to prescribe rules about ballot layout, Fla. Stat. § 101.151(9)(a), and to provide written direction to the Supervisors, id. § 97.012(16), may make the order in which candidates appear on the ballot traceable to her, Dissenting Op. at 74-79, but we do not see how. That the Secretary has the power to prescribe rules and issue directives about ballot order, which the Supervisors might well be obliged to follow, says nothing about whether she "possess[es] authority to enforce the complained-of provision," as the causation element of standing requires. Lewis, 944 F.3d at 1299 (emphasis added) (quoting Dig. Recognition Network, Inc. v. Hutchinson, 803 F.3d 952, 958 (8th Cir. 2015)). If rulemaking authority were sufficient to establish traceability, plaintiffs could presumably also challenge a law by suing the legislators who enacted it instead of the officials who execute it. Although in many cases the same official will both make and execute a challenged regulation, that arrangement is not present here. See Fla. Stat. § 99.121.
The partial dissent also contends that an injunction forbidding the Secretary to provide the Supervisors with any instructions about ballot order would likely provide redress, Dissenting Op. at 80-81, 88, but we again do not see how. Florida law already directs the Supervisors to place candidates on the ballot in the order "provided by law," Fla. Stat. § 99.121—that is, in the order prescribed by the ballot statute, see id. § 101.151(3)(a). An injunction ordering the Secretary to stay silent would do nothing to muzzle these two sections of the Florida code, which already bind the Supervisors to list candidates in a particular order. Indeed, one of the Supervisors testified at trial that they "apply the [ballot] statute" because it "is the law." There is no contrary evidence to suggest that the Supervisors would suddenly begin to disregard state law in the absence of instructions from the Secretary.
Under the partial dissent's theory of traceability and redressability, the only relief that might possibly redress any injuries from ballot order would be an injunction ordering the Secretary to promulgate a rule requiring the Supervisors to place candidates on the ballot in an order contrary to the ballot statute. But the voters  and organizations never requested such extraordinary relief, and for good reason. Any such relief would have raised serious federalism concerns, and it is doubtful that a federal court would have authority to order it. See Va. Office for Prot. & Advocacy v. Stewart, 563 U.S. 247, 255, 131 S. Ct. 1632, 179 L. Ed. 2d 675 (2011) (explaining that the Ex parte Young exception to sovereign immunity "is limited to [the] precise situation" in which "a federal court commands a state official to do nothing more than refrain from violating federal law"); cf. New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 177-78, 112 S. Ct. 2408, 120 L. Ed. 2d 120 (1992) (holding that the federal government could not commandeer states to enact or enforce a federal regulatory scheme).
In any event, it is also far from clear that ordering the Secretary to promulgate a rule that is contrary to the ballot statute would even make redress likely. The voters and organizations have not argued that the Supervisors are likely to ignore a state statute that obliges them to place candidates on the ballot in a particular order in favor of a regulation issued by the Secretary. Again, their hesitation is not without good reason: Florida law is clear that when a regulation and a statute conflict, the statute prevails. See Nicholas v. Wainwright, 152 So. 2d 458, 460 (Fla. 1963). The partial dissent asserts that in this scenario the Supervisors would likely follow the Secretary's instructions over the statute. Dissenting Op. at 88-89. But "[w]e do not know what would justify" the partial dissent's confidence when Florida law is to the contrary. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 570 (plurality opinion).
It bears emphasis that even the district court understood the traceability and redressability problems inherent in this lawsuit. In an attempt to avoid those problems, it took the truly remarkable step of enjoining nonparties. Although the decision to enjoin nonparties was unjustifiable, it makes clear what the partial dissent says is murky: the Secretary plainly is not the cause of any alleged injuries from ballot order, and relief against her cannot redress those injuries. To satisfy traceability and redressability, the voters and organizations should have sued the Supervisors of Elections instead of the Secretary of State. That approach would have made for more defendants, but nothing prevented the voters and organizations from taking that course of action. See Socialist Workers Party v. Leahy, 145 F.3d 1240, 1243 (11th Cir. 1998) (explaining that the plaintiffs filed suit "against the Secretary of State and the sixty-seven county supervisors of elections"). Because they failed to sue the Supervisors, the voters and organizations lack Article III standing.
 IV. CONCLUSION
By entering a judgment on the merits when it had no case or controversy before it, the district court offered "no more than an expression of opinion upon the validity of the [law] in question." Muskrat v. United States, 219 U.S. 346, 362, 31 S. Ct. 250, 55 L. Ed. 246, 46 Ct. Cl. 656 (1911). That kind of advisory opinion is beyond the power of federal courts. The district court should have dismissed the action for lack of standing. It erred by reaching the merits and entering an injunction against nonparties whom it had no authority to enjoin. We VACATE the judgment against the Secretary and REMAND with instructions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.
Concur by: WILLIAM PRYOR; JILL PRYOR (In Part)  
Concur




WILLIAM PRYOR