
I join the majority's opinion in full. I write separately—and with some authority—to respond to the assertion in Judge Wilson's dissent that "the Attorney General can act as a sword to enforce the Minimum Wage Act" and so may be the cause of Marnika Lewis's and Antoin Adams's injuries. Wilson Dissenting Op. at 48. Judge Wilson's dissent rests on a fundamental misunderstanding about Alabama law. Although the Attorney General of Alabama has broad authority to bring civil actions "necessary to protect the rights and interests of the state," Ala. Code § 36-15-12, the Minimum Wage Act is not the kind of law the Attorney General can "enforce" against a municipality or anyone else for that matter. So the alleged prospect of enforcement by the Attorney General cannot be the cause of Lewis's and Adams's injuries for purposes of standing under Article III. U.S. Const. art. III.
To be sure, Lewis and Adams have been injured by their employers' refusal to pay the minimum wage mandated by Birmingham City Ordinance No. 15-124. But the majority opinion correctly explains that this economic injury is not fairly traceable to the Attorney General because Alabama's Minimum Wage Act, which preempts the Ordinance, operates entirely of its own force to relieve Birmingham employers of their obligations under the Ordinance. Majority Op. at 19-23. As the majority opinion observes, the Act provides no mechanism for enforcement by the Attorney General whatsoever. Id. at 19.  Instead, the Act forbids political subdivisions to impose any wage mandate "that is not required by state or federal law," declares any such mandates "void," and "preempts the entire field of regulation in this state touching in any way upon...wages." Ala. Code §§ 25-7-41(b), (c), 25-7-45(b).
The absence of an enforcement mechanism is unsurprising in preemption laws that do not "regulate conduct directly" but instead make clear that political subdivisions "may not regulate certain areas of conduct (or at least may not do so in particular ways)." Caleb Nelson, Preemption, 86 Va. L. Rev. 225, 261 (2000). Because this kind of preemption law—"the sort typically associated with 'field' preemption," id.—does not regulate primary conduct, it makes little sense to speak of "enforcing" such a law. The only actors that "enforce" these laws are courts, and they do so only when performing their judicial duty of choosing between applying a local ordinance and giving effect to a higher state law depriving the ordinance of authority. See id. at 261-62; see generally Philip Hamburger, Law and Judicial Duty (2008). When courts perform that duty, the Constitution of Alabama obliges them to resolve the conflict in favor of the higher state law. Ala. Const. art. IV, § 89. Because the Act preempts the field of wage regulation in Alabama but does not regulate primary conduct, it is not the kind of law the Attorney General can enforce by "prosecut[ing], in the name of the state, [a] civil action[]." Ala. Code § 36-15-12.
Relying on section 36-15-12, Judge Wilson's dissent insists that "the Attorney General does have the legal authority to enforce the Minimum Wage Act against the City of Birmingham." Wilson Dissenting Op. at 54. It explains that "the Attorney General recently—and successfully—sued the City of Birmingham under its general enforcement authority in § 36-15-12 to enforce an Alabama state law—the Memorial Preservation Act." Id. at 49. But that enforcement action says nothing about the Attorney General's ability to enforce the field-preemption provisions of the Minimum Wage Act.
Unlike the Minimum Wage Act, the Memorial Preservation Act is not a field-preemption law; instead, it regulates primary conduct. It forbids the removal or renaming of certain "architecturally significant...monument[s]" on public property without permission from the Committee on Alabama Monument Protection. Ala. Code §§ 41-9-232, 41-9-235. And it expressly provides for enforcement by the Attorney General: "If the Attorney General determines that an entity exercising control of public property" has violated the Act, "the entity shall be fined twenty-five thousand dollars . . . for each violation." Id. §41-9-235(a)(2)(d). Because the Memorial Preservation Act regulates primary conduct and empowers the Attorney General to fine violators, it makes perfect sense that he can enforce the Act by prosecuting a civil action under section 36-15-12 "to protect the rights and interests of the state." Id. § 36-15-12. But so far as I am aware, there is no authority in Alabama law for the proposition that the Attorney General may sue to enforce a field-preemption law.
In short, there is no prospect that the Attorney General will enforce the Minimum Wage Act against the City of Birmingham. Where the Attorney General has neither "taken...action to enforce" nor "threatened to enforce" a state law against a plaintiff, we have held that any injury from the law is not fairly traceable to the Attorney General. Doe v. Pryor, 344 F.3d 1282, 1285 (11th Cir. 2003). To be sure, the Attorney General in Doe also conceded that the criminal law at issue, which forbade "deviate sexual intercourse," was unconstitutional based on Lawrence v. Texas,  539 U.S. 558, 123 S. Ct. 2472, 156 L. Ed. 2d 508 (2003). Id. at 1283, 1285. That concession further eliminated any credible threat of enforcement by the Attorney General. Id. at 1285. Although the reason for the Attorney General's nonenforcement of the Act is different from the reason for not enforcing the criminal law in Doe, the fact remains that there is no prospect of his enforcement of the Act. And that fact defeats the traceability requirement of standing.
When one understands the difference between state laws regulating primary conduct and state laws preempting fields of local regulation, the error of Judge Wilson's dissent becomes clear. Because the Minimum Wage Act is a field-preemption law, it is not plausible that the Attorney General could "act as a sword to enforce" the Act against Birmingham. Wilson Dissenting Op. at 48. So the alleged prospect of enforcement cannot establish the causal connection between the Attorney General and Lewis's and Adams's injuries that Article III requires.
