, dissenting. Even in ordinary times, the district court's injunction in this case would be deeply flawed. But these are no ordinary times. In the midst of a once-in-a-century pandemic, the district court broadly enjoined the State of Tennessee from enforcing a measure at the heart of the State's response. In doing so, the court committed numerous legal errors, made hardly any factual findings, issued an overly broad injunction, and brazenly substituted its own policy views for those of the elected officials who are actually fighting the pandemic. All because the district court thought that a three-week delay for certain abortions might prevent some unidentified person from having an abortion. Most cases of judicial aggrandizement have costs. But in few are the potential costs so great. I would reverse.
I.
Two weeks ago, the Governor of Tennessee issued an executive order—based on guidance from various medical organizations—in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Governor's order explains the critical importance of conserving what's known as "personal protective equipment" (e.g., face masks, gloves, protective clothing) and therefore directs "[a]ll healthcare professionals and healthcare facilities" in the State to "postpone surgical and invasive procedures that are elective and non-urgent. " The order defines "elective and non-urgent" procedures as those that "are not required to provide life sustaining treatment, to prevent death or risk of substantial impairment of a major bodily function, or to prevent rapid deterioration or serious adverse consequences to a patient's physical condition if the surgical or invasive procedure is not performed, as reasonably determined by a licensed medical provider." The order will expire just after midnight on April 30, 2020—less than six days from now and exactly three weeks after it took effect.
Within days of the Governor's announcement, the plaintiffs in this case—abortion providers in Tennessee—moved to "supplement" a five-year old complaint (six months after trial) to seek a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction. The plaintiffs argued that the  executive order prohibits most "surgical abortions" in the state and thus will prevent their clients from obtaining an abortion.
A mere four days later, the district court granted the motion to supplement and entered a preliminary injunction, enjoining the enforcement of the executive order as to all surgical abortions in Tennessee. The court's analysis of why the plaintiffs were likely to succeed on the merits consisted of two paragraphs. The State then appealed. (Despite the breadth of its ruling, the district court recently denied a stay pending appeal.)
II.
The State now asks us to stay the district court's decision pending appeal and ultimately to reverse the preliminary injunction. Both requests involve the same basic factors: (1) who is likely to prevail on the merits; (2) whether the moving party is likely to suffer irreparable harm in the interim; (3) what is the balance of harms; and (4) where does the public interest lie. See Fowler v. Benson, 924 F.3d 247, 256 (6th Cir. 2019); Serv. Emps. Int'l Union Local 1 v. Husted, 698 F.3d 341, 343 (6th Cir. 2012) (per curiam). The plaintiffs' failure to show a likelihood of success on the merits would itself warrant reversal. See, e.g., Fowler, 924 F.3d at 259-60. But the other factors counsel the same outcome. And even if the district court was correct to grant a preliminary injunction (it was not), these same factors show that the injunction was much broader than permitted under the law.
Success on the Merits. Start with the plaintiffs' likelihood of success on the merits. The basic question is whether the executive order places an "undue burden" on a woman's ability to have an abortion. Planned Parenthood of Se. Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 874, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 120 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1992). As the modifier "undue" suggests, not just any "incidental effect . . . making it more difficult or more expensive" to have an abortion will do. Id. Rather, the state regulation must create a "substantial obstacle" for women seeking an abortion. Id. at 877. But importantly, we do not consider any burden in isolation. Instead, we must consider "the burdens a law imposes on abortion access together with the benefits those laws confer" and then "weigh[] the asserted benefits against the burdens." Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt, 136 S. Ct. 2292, 2309, 2310, 195 L. Ed. 2d 665 (2016) (emphasis  added). In short, the plaintiffs must show that the order imposes a burden and that this burden outweighs the order's asserted benefits.
Given this framework, the district court committed two fundamental errors. First, it failed to make the necessary factual findings to show that the executive order imposes a burden on anyone's rights. Second, the court failed even to acknowledge the benefits of the executive order and  thus necessarily failed to balance its speculative burden against these benefits. Either error would warrant reversal. Together, they certainly do.
Begin with the burden. The district court failed to make specific findings about whether the executive order creates a "substantial obstacle" for women seeking an abortion. See Casey, 505 U.S. at 874. At most, the district court pointed out that the executive order will delay certain abortions for three weeks. But that doesn't take the plaintiffs very far. Both the Supreme Court and our court have upheld laws that have the effect of delaying abortions for days or even weeks. See, e.g., Ohio v. Akron Ctr. for Reprod. Health, 497 U.S. 502, 514, 110 S. Ct. 2972, 111 L. Ed. 2d 405 (1990) (up to three-week delay); Cincinnati Women's Servs., Inc. v. Taft, 468 F.3d 361, 366, 372-74 (6th Cir. 2006) (up to two-week delay). Indeed, for the last forty years, the Supreme Court has "repeatedly upheld a wide variety of abortion regulations that entail some delay in the abortion." Garza v. Hargan, 874 F.3d 735, 755-56, 433 U.S. App. D.C. 72 (D.C. Cir. 2017) (en banc) (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting) (collecting cases). The district court failed to grapple with any of these precedents. Its silence speaks volumes.
(For its part, the majority tries to distinguish these cases by saying those delays were outside the state's control. It doesn't offer any support for this distinction. But more importantly, the distinction seems to assume that a once-in-a-century pandemic is within a state's control.)
To be clear, the district court enjoined a version of the order that didn't exist. It acted as if the State had banned most pre-viability abortions. But that's just not the case. Tennessee law generally allows women to seek an abortion until the twentieth week of their pregnancy. See Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 39-15-211, -212. So any woman who was less than seventeen-weeks pregnant when the order went into effect would still have time to seek an abortion after the order expires.
The plaintiffs speculate that there might be women out there who were more than seventeen-weeks pregnant when the order was issued and who will now be unable to obtain an  abortion in Tennessee. (Or who otherwise would be unable to obtain an abortion for some reason.) But speculation usually doesn't count for much. See, e.g., Mazurek v. Armstrong, 520 U.S. 968, 972-74, 117 S. Ct. 1865, 138 L. Ed. 2d 162 (1997) (per curiam). And there's no reason it should have counted for so much here. Make no mistake—the burden was on the plaintiffs to bring forward concrete evidence (1) that such women exist, (2) that they want an abortion, and (3) that they would be unable to obtain one. See Winter v. NRDC, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 20, 129 S. Ct. 365, 172 L. Ed. 2d 249 (2008). The majority claims a snippet of evidence supports this concern—an affidavit that vaguely states that "some patients" will be prevented from obtaining an abortion under the executive order. R. 232-5, Pg. ID 5887. But the district court didn't make any factual findings on this front. Nor do the plaintiffs even cite this evidence on appeal.
Not only that. No one—not the plaintiffs, not the district court, not even the majority—has made any effort to quantify how this hypothetical pool of women relates to the broader pool of women affected by the order—as binding precedent requires. See Gonzales v. Carhart, 550 U.S. 124, 167-68, 127 S. Ct. 1610, 167 L. Ed. 2d 480 (2007); Cincinnati Women's Servs., 468 F.3d at 367-68 (explaining that courts must consider whether a restriction will operate as a "substantial obstacle" in "a large fraction of the cases in which the abortion restriction is relevant" (cleaned up)). In fact, the State points out that the vast  majority of abortions in Tennessee occur before the seventeenth week of pregnancy. The plaintiffs haven't offered any evidence in response. So even if speculation were the stuff of winning legal claims, plaintiffs still haven't made the proper showing.
But we aren't even done with speculation. The plaintiffs (and now the majority) say that the Governor of Tennessee might extend the executive order beyond the current three-week period. This is a smart move—it makes a short, finite burden look like an indefinite one, exaggerating its severity. The problem is that the Governor hasn't said he will impose any restrictions on medical procedures after April 30, which is when the order in this case expires. If the Governor issues a new order limiting surgeries beyond that date, it is possible that he will extend the existing restrictions—but it is just as likely that the new order will contain a different and perhaps more tailored set of restrictions. The majority simply assumes it will be the former. Based on what? The plaintiffs and majority point to a statement by the Surgeon General of the United States about extending certain public-health measures. But in this country, federal officials don't speak on  behalf of state leaders. And again, the plaintiffs haven't pointed to any evidence about what the Governor of Tennessee will do. As the crisis facing our country continues to develop, so too will government responses. And those who have problems with those responses must wait until actual and imminent harms arise. See, e.g., D.T. v. Sumner Cty. Sch., 942 F.3d 324, 327 (6th Cir. 2019). Federal courts are not in the business of issuing advisory opinions, let alone advisory injunctions.
All that is reason enough to reverse. But the district court also committed another fundamental error: it entirely failed to balance these purported burdens against the executive order's benefits. See Whole Woman's Health, 136 S. Ct. at 2309. The court didn't even mention the benefits of the order in its "undue burden" analysis. That flatly contradicts Supreme Court precedent, which "requires that courts consider the burdens a law imposes on abortion access together with the benefits those laws confer." Id. Count that as another error warranting reversal.
Perhaps the district court didn't perform this balance because it couldn't do so. How does one balance a harm to some unspecified number of people? The district court didn't tell us and the majority doesn't either.
One could stop there. But in fact, Tennessee's interests in protecting its citizens from the pandemic cannot be overstated. All agree that these are far from ordinary times. Over the past few weeks, our entire nation has come together to combat a generation-defining crisis. Many have done so at great personal sacrifice.
In Tennessee, as in so many other states, the Governor has taken extraordinary steps to fight the pandemic. He declared a state of emergency, required all residents to remain at home except in limited circumstances, and ordered the closure of most businesses. As part of that effort, he also signed the generally applicable order at issue here. The Governor's order allowed the state to conserve valuable personal protective equipment for those fighting the coronavirus. The order protects those who have undertaken perhaps the greatest personal sacrifice in protecting the citizens of Tennessee. There's no reason to doubt that the Governor took these measures because "the safety of the general public" demanded it. Jacobson v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11, 29, 25 S. Ct. 358, 49 L. Ed. 643 (1905).
 Our law has long-protected just these types of decisions from judicial interference  based on purported violations of substantive due process. In times of emergency, elected officials need room to do what they were elected to do—to govern. Sometimes their actions will incidentally impact a person's liberty interests. But the Supreme Court has upheld such actions anyway, explaining that "[r]eal liberty for all could not exist under the operation of a principle which recognizes the right of each individual person to use his own [person or property], . . . regardless of the injury that may be done to others." Id. at 26. And there's no abortion exception to this well-settled principle. To the contrary, the Supreme Court has made clear from the beginning that the ability to obtain an abortion is neither "absolute" nor "unlimited." Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113, 154, 93 S. Ct. 705, 35 L. Ed. 2d 147 (1973) (citing Jacobson, 197 U.S. 11, 25 S. Ct. 358, 49 L. Ed. 643).
Of course, this does not mean that the courts should rubber stamp emergency measures—far from it. See Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 28-29. But it does mean that judges should act with care during such times, recognizing the limits of our knowledge, institutional capacity, and lawful authority. See id. at 30-31; cf. Gonzales, 550 U.S. at 163 (explaining that the Supreme Court has "given state and federal legislatures wide discretion to pass legislation in areas where there is medical and scientific uncertainty").
Remarkably, the district court failed to acknowledge—let alone apply—these principles before it granted the injunction. Nor did it acknowledge the State's heightened interests during times of emergency. Based on its decision, one might think that the executive order would be unconstitutional no matter how many lives it could save and no matter how few—if any— abortions it might prevent. Even the majority calls this omission "unfortunate."
In a subsequent order denying a stay pending appeal, the district court seems to have recognized that it erred by ignoring the State's primary legal authority for its position, Jacobson v. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11, 25 S. Ct. 358, 49 L. Ed. 643 (1905). But rather than correct its mistake, the court doubled down, finding the facts of Jacobson to be readily "distinguishable" from the facts of this case. In doing so, the district court overlooked the basic principle of Jacobson: that states may respond to emergencies in the face of substantive-due-process rights, so long as they act reasonably and don't single out specific rights or persons for disfavored treatment. See id. at 28-30.
 No one claims that the State of Tennessee has singled out specific rights or persons in its response to the current pandemic. The executive order in this case applies to all non-essential medical procedures. And again, the Governor has issued several other orders that apply to all persons and that affect every aspect of daily life across the state.
Nor have the plaintiffs shown that the State has acted unreasonably in requiring its residents to postpone non-essential medical procedures for a three-week period. Just contrast this case with the facts of Jacobson, where the Supreme Court upheld a state's authority to forcibly vaccinate individuals. See id. at 27-30. If the State can physically invade a person's body in response to an emergency, then it surely may require people to delay certain medical procedures for the same purpose.
On these points the majority, for its part, is conclusory: it does little more than assert that the executive order "is, beyond all question, a plain, palpable invasion of rights secured by the fundamental law." Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 31.  Given that plaintiffs haven't established a constitutional violation in the first place, they certainly haven't done so "beyond all question."
The majority also dismisses the State's interests on the ground that the executive order has no "real" and "substantial" relationship to the current pandemic. Id. That claim is remarkable given that the order follows recommendations from our nation's leading public-health institution. See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Strategies to Optimize the Supply of PPE and Equipment (last visited Apr. 24, 2020), https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ppe-strategy/index.html (explaining that equipment "shortages are currently posing a tremendous challenge to the US healthcare system" and recommending the cancellation of "elective and non-urgent procedures/appointments"). Plus, Jacobson clearly tells us that it's "no part of the function of a court or a jury to determine which one of two modes [is] likely to be the most effective for the protection of the public against disease." 197 U.S. at 30. The majority doesn't explain why our court is an exception to that rule. And the amicus briefs the majority cites to discredit the State's rationale for the executive order "are more formidable by their number than by their inherent value." Id. One need only open a newspaper to appreciate the importance of preserving medical equipment at this time. So if nothing else, Jacobson forecloses the plaintiffs' claim.
 Irreparable Harm. Consider next what (if any) irreparable harm the plaintiffs will suffer without an injunction. To be clear, the plaintiffs don't claim that they themselves will suffer any irreparable harm. Rather, the plaintiffs assert that the women they purport to represent will suffer irreparable harm without an injunction. But cf. Gee v. June Med. Servs. L.L.C., 140 S. Ct. 35, 204 L. Ed. 2d 1193 (2019) (Mem.) (granting certiorari to consider whether traditional third-party standing rules apply in abortion cases).
The district court reasoned that the plaintiffs had established an irreparable injury because it thought that the executive order would prevent some women in Tennessee from having an abortion. But again the district court failed to make any factual findings showing that the order would prevent any particular woman from obtaining an abortion. To satisfy the irreparable-injury requirement, parties must demonstrate "likely" harm. Winter, 555 U.S. at 22. And the plaintiffs offer only speculation.
The district court also asserted that delays in the provision of abortions might irreparably harm some women by making their abortions more dangerous. But this argument stands in stark contrast with the claim that "[a]bortion is one of the safest medical procedures performed in the United States." Whole Woman's Health, 136 S. Ct. at 2320 (Ginsburg, J., concurring) (citation omitted). In fact, the plaintiffs themselves say that "abortion is extremely safe throughout pregnancy." Plaintiffs Br. at 5. Is it an irreparable injury for a medical procedure to be only "extremely safe"? But again the district court addressed none of these facts on its way to its destination.
Meanwhile, the executive order allows doctors to perform an abortion when a woman would suffer "serious adverse consequences to [her] physical condition" without the surgery "as reasonably determined by a licensed medical provider." The plaintiffs haven't made any effort to explain why this exception (which contains built-in deference to medical professionals) would not give them the flexibility they need during this time of national crisis. And again, it was the plaintiffs' burden to show that the executive order (with its  exception) causes an irreparable injury. They failed to do so.
 Balance of Harms. Consider also the irreparable harms created by the district court's injunction. Of course, a state always suffers irreparable injury when it's wrongfully enjoined from enforcing one of its laws. See Abbott v. Perez, 138 S. Ct. 2305, 2324, 201 L. Ed. 2d 714 & n.17 (2018); Maryland v. King, 567 U.S. 1301, 1303, 133 S. Ct. 1, 183 L. Ed. 2d 667 (2012) (Roberts, C.J., in chambers). But that's far from the only harm here. The Governor issued the executive order to preserve critical medical equipment. Every piece of equipment used for something besides the pandemic response could cost a life—the life of someone who acts selflessly to help others in a time of crisis. Simply put: doctors, nurses, and first responders will die without proper equipment. And that's to say nothing of their family members, whose lives will be put at risk too. Given the twin risks of exponential community spread and hospital overload, every additional infection among first responders represents a significant threat to public health. It's hard to imagine a scenario in which the harm imposed by an injunction would be greater.
The district court brushed off these concerns, saying the plaintiffs have already taken measures to reduce their use of medical equipment during surgical abortions. The district court apparently thought that the State would be harmed only if surgical abortions used an "appreciable amount" of medical equipment. (The Majority seems to think the same.) But neither the district court nor the Majority is in any position to second-guess the Governor's judgment as to the amount of equipment that is really necessary to keep healthcare workers alive.
The district court also asserted that the executive order would be counterproductive for various policy reasons. Again the district court's (and now the majority's) willingness to constitutionalize its own policy judgments—in the midst of a national emergency no less—is remarkable. If anything has remained constant over the past hundred years of constitutional law, it's that courts aren't supposed to second guess policymakers based on their own subjective judgments of what makes for good policy. See, e.g., Perry v. Perez, 565 U.S. 388, 394, 132 S. Ct. 934, 181 L. Ed. 2d 900 (2012) (per curiam) (noting that courts must exercise care not to displace "legitimate state policy judgments with the court's own preferences"). All the more when our elected officials are tasked with making difficult decisions under conditions of uncertainty, risk, and imperfect information. See Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 30-31.
 The district court and majority also note that some women might travel to other states to have an abortion and that this might further aggravate the current pandemic. But neither the plaintiffs nor the district court nor the majority have pointed to a single person who said she would need to travel to another state to get an abortion. So again this is nothing more than speculation.
Public Interest. This factor points in the same direction. See Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 435-36, 129 S. Ct. 1749, 173 L. Ed. 2d 550 (2009); Winter, 555 U.S. at 24-26. Plainly the public interest is served by a state's ability to enforce a regulation whose purpose and effect is to save the lives of healthcare workers. The district court and majority assert that the public interest favors a preliminary injunction because it's always in the public interest to prevent the violation of constitutional rights. See, e.g., Dodds v. U.S. Dep't of Educ., 845 F.3d 217, 222 (6th Cir. 2016) (per curiam). That reasoning would have more force if the plaintiffs  or district court had shown that the regulation actually violates any constitutional rights. But again the majority's reasoning is only conclusory.
Scope of the Injunction. Finally, the district court plainly erred in defining the injunction's scope. Preliminary injunctions are an "extraordinary remedy." Winter, 555 U.S. at 24. That means courts that shouldn't grant them based on speculative harms, which is what the district court did here; and that "the scope of relief should be strictly tailored to accomplish only that which the situation specifically requires." Sharpe v. Cureton, 319 F.3d 259, 273 (6th Cir. 2003) (citation omitted). As the Supreme Court put it, "[i]t is neither our obligation nor within our traditional institutional role to resolve questions of constitutionality with respect to each potential situation that might develop." Gonzales, 550 U.S. at 168. And an injunction's proper scope becomes all the more important in cases involving government officials—and especially in cases where, as here, federal courts enjoin them. See Rizzo v. Goode, 423 U.S. 362, 378-80, 96 S. Ct. 598, 46 L. Ed. 2d 561 (1976); see also Gonzales, 550 U.S. at 168 ("It would indeed be undesirable for [courts] to consider every conceivable situation which might possibly arise in the application of complex and comprehensive legislation." (cleaned up)).
But again the district court disregarded these well-settled legal principles. The district court's injunction doesn't just apply to women who might lose their ability to have an abortion before Tennessee's twenty-week deadline; it applies to all women who seek a surgical abortion—  no matter their ability to obtain an abortion after the order expires. Injunctions should be aimed with rifle-scope precision. The district court here used a twelve-gauge.
The majority does acknowledge at least this error and tries to remedy it on appeal. But in doing so, the majority doesn't fix the problem and also creates a problem of its own: it creates three "classes" of women—all of them amorphous, and thus likely to sow confusion going forward. In effect, the majority has certified a class under Rule 23(b)(2) without any request to do so or any effort to comply with the Federal Rules. Nor does the majority explain why the executive order unduly burdens most of the putative class. It simply announces that the injunction will apply to them.
The district court's errors here are not unprecedented: Two other circuits have recently encountered similar district court decisions, and both circuits promptly corrected them—in one case twice. See In re Rutledge, No. 20-1791, 956 F.3d 1018, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 12893, 2020 WL 1933122 (8th Cir. Apr. 22, 2020); In re Abbott, No. 20-50296, 956 F.3d 696, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 12616, 2020 WL 1911216 (5th Cir. Apr. 20, 2020); In re Abbott, 954 F.3d 772 (5th Cir. 2020). But cf. Robinson v. Att'y Gen., No. 20-11401-B, 957 F.3d 1171, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 13096, 2020 WL 1952370, at *4 (11th Cir. Apr. 23, 2020) (denying a stay pending appeal in "an atypical case" because, among other things, the state "concede[d] that the substance of the district court's preliminary injunction is consistent with its own . . . interpretation of [its executive order]"). We should have done the same.
***
To sum up: the district court granted an injunction without much effort to apply the relevant law, without specific factual findings, and without any attempt to tailor the remedy to the purported constitutional violation. If that doesn't count as an abuse of discretion, I don't know what would. I respectfully dissent.

 

