.
The district court issued an order refusing to consider the plaintiffs' motion for a preliminary injunction. Because the order had the practical effect of refusing the injunction itself, this court has appellate jurisdiction. I respectfully dissent from the court's contrary conclusion.
The plaintiffs allege a "serious, perhaps irreparable, consequence" from the lack of an injunction: the lifelong effects of opioid exposure on unborn children. Carson v. Am. Brands, Inc., 450 U.S. 79, 84, 101 S. Ct. 993, 67 L. Ed. 2d 59 (1981) (cleaned up). And the failure to grant their injunction now isn't effectively reviewable in the future—neither when the district court agrees to consider the motion (whenever that may be) nor during a later appeal. Id. After all, by that point, some number of unborn children will have been exposed to what the plaintiffs allege are unsafe levels of prescription opioids. No court will be able to rewind the clock and undo their injuries.
The court's order makes two missteps. First, it blends the threshold inquiry of appellate jurisdiction with other issues that belong downstream of that threshold inquiry. True, the plaintiffs haven't alleged harm to themselves. Also true, the harms they allege may be "speculative" or "unlikely." But those points go either to the merits of the proposed injunction or to the plaintiffs' standing. They don't go to this court's power to hear an appeal. What matters for appellate jurisdiction is simply whether the plaintiffs have alleged an irreparable consequence, not whether they actually merit relief. See id. at 85, 89. And if we lack appellate jurisdiction, then the plaintiffs' standing isn't before us either.
The court's second misstep is overlooking the time-sensitive nature of preliminary relief. Since the whole point of a preliminary injunction is its immediacy, "not now, but maybe later" is just another way of saying "no." Gillis v. U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 759 F.2d 565, 568 (6th Cir. 1985); see also Carson, 450 U.S. at 88-89 (noting that the timing of relief matters). Consider what happened here. The plaintiffs believe that certain ongoing medical practices are negligent and will cause serious harms. They tried to move for a preliminary injunction to restrain those practices. The district court could have granted leave, taken the motion under consideration for an appropriate time, and ultimately disposed of the motion in a short, simple order. Instead, it issued an order telling the plaintiffs they weren't even allowed to file their motion until further notice. [R. 8, Pg. ID 1448.] With that order, the court made clear that it would do nothing to change the status quo for the indefinite future. If that's not the practical equivalent of a denial, what is?
This court sees it differently, viewing the order on appeal as an adjunct to a "case management order." But as the court acknowledges, what matters here is substance, not labels. Abbott v. Perez, 138 S. Ct. 2305, 2320, 201 L. Ed. 2d 714 (2018). There's no rule of law that puts all case-management orders in one bucket and all appealable orders in another bucket. And there's no reason an order under a case-management plan can't have the practical, as-applied effect of refusing an injunction. When a court's case-management plan includes ignoring emergency requests for preliminary relief, that's when the Carson doctrine comes into play.
That doesn't mean parties can always appeal when a district court fails to dispense relief on demand. No one is entitled to the impossible and that includes instantaneous rulings. The demands of briefing, research, and deliberation mean that even the speediest district court takes some time to decide a motion. So defining a reasonable time is a matter of degree.
Still, a district court can sit on a motion for too long. And when that happens, the remedy can't be an appeal, because there's no appealable order. See 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(2). Instead, the remedy for unreasonable delay is a mandamus petition to compel a ruling. See, e.g., In re Hijazi, 589 F.3d 401, 409 (7th Cir. 2009). That's no easy road, since it requires showing a clear abuse of discretion. In re Univ. of Mich., 936 F.3d 460, 466 (6th Cir. 2019). And as the court's order rightly emphasizes, district courts have wide discretion when it comes to managing their dockets.
Some district-court actions may blur the line between the denial of an injunction (which is appealable) and delay in deciding a request for an injunction (which isn't appealable but can be challenged through mandamus). But one simple question will usually do the trick: Is the request for injunctive relief still pending before the court? If the answer is yes, it hasn't been denied. But if the answer is no because of a district-court order, that order is almost always appealable.
That lens makes this an easy case. The district court issued an order that fully disposed of the plaintiffs' motion (though not on the merits). The order didn't leave the motion to hang in the air; it threw it out of court. The plaintiffs then appealed from that order. Whether their appeal has any merit is downriver of this court's power to hear it. Because the district court's order effectively refused a request for an injunction, I would hold that we have appellate jurisdiction and allow the case to proceed to merits briefing. Thus, I respectfully dissent from the court's order dismissing this appeal.

 

