.
The executive branch has broad power to enforce our nation's immigration laws. As a result, the Supreme Court has reminded us that we must be "highly deferential" to the executive's enforcement decisions—lest we arrogate the executive's power as our own. Nasrallah v. Barr, 140 S. Ct. 1683, 1692, 207 L. Ed. 2d 111 (2020). Because the executive branch acted within its broad discretion to deny the asylum claim at issue here, I respectfully dissent.
Roberto Carlos Guerrero Ramirez illegally entered the United States by swimming across the Rio Grande River near Eagle Pass, Texas. Border Patrol agents quickly detained him. Initially, Guerrero refused to answer the officers' questions. But he soon sought asylum, claiming he would face persecution if deported to Nicaragua (his native country).
An immigration judge then held a hearing on Guerrero's asylum request. The judge determined that, although Guerrero's testimony seemed credible, he "should provide evidence that corroborate[d] [his] testimony." 8 U.S.C. § 1158(b)(1)(B)(ii). It was thus Guerrero's burden to "provide" corroborative evidence or to show that he could not "reasonably obtain the evidence." Id.; see also Gaye v. Lynch, 788 F.3d 519, 529-30 (6th Cir. 2015).
During his asylum hearing, Guerrero neither provided corroborative evidence nor explained why it was not reasonably obtainable—despite having ample opportunity to do so. See, e.g., A.R. 155-56, 170-71.1  He thus failed to carry his burden under 8 U.S.C. § 1158(b)(1)(B)(ii). And as a result, the immigration judge correctly rejected his asylum application, and the Board of Immigration Appeals correctly affirmed.
Guerrero now argues (among other things) that the immigration judge failed to give him sufficient notice regarding the corroborative evidence that he should have submitted. But in Gaye, we squarely held that "federal law does not entitle illegal aliens to notice from the Immigration Court as to what sort of evidence the alien must produce to carry his burden." 788 F.3d at 530. Rather, the immigration judge may rule on the adequacy of an applicant's corroborative evidence after considering the record in its entirety. See id. at 529-30. Since Guerrero's argument runs headfirst into Gaye, his claim is unlikely to succeed on the merits.
The majority reaches the opposite conclusion for two reasons. First, the majority relies on Guzman-Vazquez v. Barr, which held that before an immigration judge rules against a petitioner "on the basis of his failure to produce corroborative evidence," the petitioner must have "an opportunity to explain its absence." 959 F.3d 253, 263 (6th Cir. 2020). But that holding can't be reconciled with Gaye. See id. at 275 (Murphy, J., dissenting) ("The majority's new rule conflicts with Gaye's reading of the statutory text and structure."). And in our circuit, the first-in-time decision controls. See Salmi v. Sec'y of Health & Human Servs., 774 F.2d 685, 689 (6th Cir. 1985).
Second, the majority nitpicks the immigration judge's factual findings. It points to evidence that Guerrero claims corroborates his assertions and then takes issue with the immigration judge for saying that "no evidence" supported those assertions. The problem with this is that the immigration judge explained why the very evidence the majority points to was not convincing. See A.R. 83-84. And we may not reject those explanations "unless any reasonable adjudicator would be compelled to" do so. Nasrallah, 140 S. Ct. at 1692 (emphasis added). The majority does not even try to explain how that "highly deferential" standard is satisfied here. Id.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent from the stay order.
ENTERED BY ORDER OF THE COURT

 

