, concurring in part and dissenting in part. To get the right answer, we must ask the right question. For qualified immunity,  the right question is not whether Officers Babinec and Atkinson took the best possible course of action when they brought Leticia Rudolph to the hospital for a mental health evaluation. The right question is not even whether they were correct to fear that Rudolph might harm herself. Instead, the right question is whether the officers were "plainly incompetent" in fearing that Rudolph might harm herself. District of Columbia v. Wesby, 138 S. Ct. 577, 589, 199 L. Ed. 2d 453 (2018). They were not.
Though the parties tell different stories, the core facts underlying the seizure are uncontested. The officers pulled Kyle Rudolph over for speeding. He admitted to carrying a gun and told the officers that he took the gun from Rudolph "so she wouldn't harm herself." R. 53-4, Pg. ID 204. The officers also recall him saying that Rudolph was suicidal.1  Kyle Rudolph then showed Officer Hodges text messages from both Rudolph's son and Rudolph herself suggesting she might be at risk. Finally, the officers found Rudolph intoxicated. So the officers knew that (1) close family members were worried that Rudolph might harm herself, (2) one family member was so worried that he had taken away Rudolph's registered weapon at the request of another concerned family member, and (3) Rudolph was intoxicated. Given these facts, an officer in the field could have reasonably concluded that Rudolph might harm herself.
The law is also clear. First, we must view these facts in totality, not in isolation. See Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 588-89. It is all too easy to "identif[y] innocent explanations" for specific facts. Id. at 589. But this kind of "divide-and-conquer approach is improper." Id. Second, when it comes to probable cause, we deal in "probabilities," not certainties. Id. at 586  ("Probable cause is not a high bar." (internal quotation marks omitted)). And third, we are ultimately trying to determine whether, given the undisputed facts, the officers were "plainly incompetent" when they concluded that Rudolph might harm herself. Id. at 589. They were not.
The majority missteps because it takes undisputed facts—the texts—and construes them in isolation and in a particular light. But if facts are undisputed, the question is not whether we can think of an alternative, innocent explanation. The question is whether any reasonable officer could draw a different inference without crossing into plain incompetence. See id. at 587 (asking whether "[a] reasonable officer could infer" a conclusion from the undisputed facts). Take Rudolph's text "Good bye." No one disputes the officers saw it. Rather, the dispute is how a reasonable officer could understand those words given the circumstances. Could they construe it as good riddance? Sure. But was it unreasonable for the officers to worry the text meant goodbye forever? No. Given the information known to the officers—that Rudolph's gun had been confiscated, that her own son was concerned, and that her ex-husband told the officers that Rudolph might harm herself—the officers were not  plainly incompetent to err on the side of caution.
In addition, while intoxication alone means little, it means much more given the surrounding facts. Id. at 588 ("Our precedents recognize that the whole is often greater than the sum of its parts—especially when the parts are viewed in isolation."). No one can dispute that intoxicated people make detrimental choices they otherwise would not make if they were sober. So the officers were surely reasonable in concluding that Rudolph's intoxication heightened the risk of harm.
Nor does it matter that the officers relied on family members rather than a medical professional to determine that Rudolph was at risk. Officers do not have the luxury of consulting a mental health professional when they are deciding whether to take someone to a mental health professional. See, e.g., Simon v. Cook, 261 F. App'x 873, 874, 877, 881 n.4 (6th Cir. 2008). After all, the officers took Rudolph to see a medical professional, not to jail.
Qualified immunity grants police officers leeway to exercise reasonable judgment. Sometimes that judgment will mean the difference between life and death. For this reason, the  Supreme Court has "stressed that the specificity of the [clearly established] rule is especially important in the Fourth Amendment context." Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590 (internal quotation marks omitted). In Fourth Amendment cases, it is especially difficult for an officer to apply the relevant legal doctrine to the ongoing situation in front of him. Kisela v. Hughes, 138 S. Ct. 1148, 1152, 200 L. Ed. 2d 449 (2018). Thus, the Supreme Court has repeatedly "stressed the need to identify a case where an officer act[ed] under similar circumstances" and was found to violate the Fourth Amendment. Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590 (emphasis added) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The Majority Opinion has not identified such a case. It notes instead that this case "falls more on the Fisher side of the line." Majority Op. at 6 (citing Fisher v. Harden, 398 F.3d 837 (6th Cir. 2005)). That is a far cry from identifying a specific case with similar circumstances that would give an officer fair notice. Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590; see also Ashcroft v. al-Kidd, 563 U.S. 731, 742, 131 S. Ct. 2074, 179 L. Ed. 2d 1149 (2011) (warning courts "not to define clearly established law at a high level of generality"; what matters is "whether the violative nature of particular conduct is clearly established" (emphasis added)). But even if falling more on one side of a line were enough, I respectfully disagree that this case is like Fisher. In Fisher, an unrelated passerby called the police because they thought a man 250 yards in the distance might be attempting suicide by tying himself to the railroad tracks. Fisher v. Harden, 398 F.3d 837, 840 (6th Cir. 2005). Because the tip lacked veracity, this circuit held the officers did not have probable cause for a mental health seizure. Id. at 843. Here, by contrast, the concern came not from a random passerby far in the distance, but from two family members who knew Rudolph very well, including her own son. A reasonable officer would not have read Fisher to prohibit reliance on concern from family members. See Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590; al-Kidd, 563 U.S. at 742. So it did not provide fair notice to the officers here.
Courts must remember that law enforcement officers must protect the public in an uncertain and dangerous world, not the cold crucible of the courtroom. See City & Cty. of San Francisco v. Sheehan, 575 U.S. 600, 135 S. Ct. 1765, 1775, 191 L. Ed. 2d 856 (2015); Cole v. Carson, 935 F.3d 444, 2019 WL 3928715, at *22 (5th Cir. 2019) (en banc) (Ho, Oldham, JJ., dissenting) (noting that most judges have not experienced the real- world difficulties of policing). In that world, officers don't have time to debate whether the emergency in front of them falls "more on [one] side of  the line" of precedent than another. Majority Op. at 6. Indeed, the specificity requirement of qualified immunity protects officers from this very paralysis by analysis. As the Supreme Court repeatedly reminds us, "[a] rule is too general if the unlawfulness of the officer's conduct does not follow immediately." Wesby, 138 S. Ct. at 590 (emphasis added) (quotation marks and citations omitted). In short, the rule must "obviously resolve whether the circumstances . . . constitute[d] probable cause." Id. The majority's "which side of the line rule" simply does not.
One need only consider some examples to see the importance of this point. Imagine the police receive a tip from a man's ex-wife and daughter saying they confiscated his weapons because they feared he would commit a mass shooting. His family members were worried about his mental state and believed him to be at risk of violence. Surely the police should not refrain from taking the man in for a mental health evaluation just because the concern came from family members alone. Or imagine that a man's children tell police officers on the street that they are worried their father might hurt their mother because he is having flashbacks that cause him to lash out violently. When the officers arrive at the home, they find the man intoxicated, though he denies that there is any problem. Should the officers really take a chance in that situation? Qualified immunity exists to insulate these difficult judgment calls. We would all be ill-served if it did not.
I fear we have placed officers in an untenable catch-22. No doubt, if the officers here had failed to act and were wrong, they would have faced significant criticism and personal guilt. Maybe even legal consequences. Qualified immunity does not enforce a regime of "damned if they do, damned if they don't." Just the opposite. It protects reasonable but mistaken judgment calls made in extremely difficult situations. Because the officers could have reasonably believed that they had probable cause for a mental health seizure under these facts, they should receive qualified immunity. Thus, I respectfully dissent from the denial of qualified immunity for the mental health seizure and concur on all other issues.

 

