. Rules are rules. In the Speedy Trial Act, Congress created a clear rule that gave parties and judges notice of their rights and obligations. In doing so, Congress set forth how to get a case dismissed for violations of the Act: move for dismissal. 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2). And failure to make such a motion "constitute[s] a waiver of the right to dismissal[.]" Id. This plain and simple process made the law easy to follow for both parties and busy district courts.
Then, like a council of revision, our court intervened to edit Congress's work. See United States v. Brown, 819 F.3d 800, 825 (6th Cir. 2016); see also Collins v. Mnuchin, 938 F.3d 553, 610-11 (2019) (en banc) (Oldham, J. and Ho, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (recounting that the Founders rejected a "council of revision" that would have given federal judges veto power over legislation). In the process, we turned a clear rule into a standard—all the while muddying the process. No longer need a defendant make a motion to dismiss. Brown, 819 F.3d at 825. Instead, an oral objection that does not ask the district judge to dismiss the charges can sometimes be enough. Id.
In doing so, I am not sure our court thought through the consequences. Imagine a defendant wants to object to a continuance, but not request a last-minute dismissal. Why would a defendant want to do this? Well, maybe because he doesn't want to start over. After all, the district court may dismiss the case without prejudice. 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2). And for a detained defendant, this is not great. The government simply re-indicts. And that often results in continued detainment for the defendant. So what looked like a lifeline for defendants who fail to move to dismiss may not be that at all.
Another reason that a defense attorney may not move to dismiss—the weakness of the government's case. Imagine you are on the eve of trial and the government needs a continuance to gather some evidence. Again, the defendant may want to object to any and all continuances, but not move to dismiss. Because, as just discussed, the consequence could be dismissal without  prejudice. And now the government can do what it couldn't do before—gather the evidence. Here, the lifeline turns out to be for the government.
With our new standard, district courts are left guessing. Is that objection a motion to dismiss or just an objection? Clarity benefits everyone—the courts, the public, and criminal defendants. That's one reason, among many, that judges must follow the statutory text. See Amul R. Thapar & Benjamin Beaton, The Pragmatism of Interpretation, 116 Mich. L. Rev. 819 (2018). Judges should interpret the law—we shouldn't redline Congress's work. Indeed, when judges rewrite the words agreed upon by Congress and the President, we aggrandize our power beyond its limits. See In re Univ. of Michigan, 936 F.3d 460, 462-63 (6th Cir. 2019). That's why the text—not our preferred outcome or better judgment—must always be the beginning and end of interpretation.
That brings us to this case. I would affirm because Tolliver did not request dismissal—either orally or in writing. But even if we imagine that he did, I agree that motion came too late. So I concur.

 

