
 [*P41]  The founding constitution of the State of Utah gave to the "Board of Pardons" the discretion to "commute punishments" with any "limitations and restrictions" that a majority of the Board might "deem proper." Utah Const. art. VII, § 12 (1896). This was the founding-era notion of parole in Utah. The Board's authority was subject to "regulations as may be provided by law, relative to the manner of applying for pardons," id., but never to the demands of "due process" as applied in judicial proceedings. Historically, the Parole Board had untrammeled discretion to decide the terms and conditions of early release from incarceration. Because early release on parole was seen as a matter of executive "grace," our law stopped far short of imposing the demands of trial process on parole hearings.21  That understanding is both reinforced in the constitution as it stands today,22  and confirmed by longstanding legislation23  and judicial practice.24  For many decades, the parole process was governed by statutes enacted by the legislature and rules adopted by the Parole Board without interference from this court.
 [*P42]  This court first inserted itself into the Parole Board's procedures in Foote v. Utah Board of Pardons, 808 P.2d 734 (Utah 1991). There, we acknowledged that parole decisions in Utah are statutorily committed to the unreviewable discretion of the Board, id. at 735 (citing Utah Code § 77-27-5(3)), and noted that parole is not generally "a protected liberty interest under the federal due process clause," id. at 734 (citing generally Greenholtz v. Inmates of Neb. Penal & Corr. Complex, 442 U.S. 1, 14-16, 99 S. Ct. 2100, 60 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1979)).25  But we nonetheless asserted, with no analysis of the language of the Utah Constitution and no attempt to tie our decision to its original understanding, that "the mandate of the due process clause" must apply "to all activities of state government." Id. at 735. And we remanded the case to the district court for further proceedings and a determination of "[w]hat may constitute due process" in the context of a parole hearing. Id.
 [*P43]  We took up the question of "what may constitute due process," id., in an original parole grant hearing in Labrum v. Utah State Board of Pardons, 870 P.2d 902 (Utah 1993). Labrum embraced the purported "reality" that original parole grant hearings "are analogous to sentencing hearings." Id. at 908. And on the basis of that "reality," Labrum held that an inmate in such a hearing has a constitutional "due process" right to "know what information the Board will be considering at the hearing . . . soon enough in advance to have a reasonable opportunity to prepare responses and rebuttal of inaccuracies." Id. at 909.
 [*P44]  We took the matter a significant step further in Neese v. Utah Board of Pardons & Parole, 2017 UT 89, 416 P.3d 663. There we established a new right (among others) of inmates "to call witnesses and present documentary evidence" in original parole grant hearings in which the Parole Board anticipates "classify[ing] as a sex offender an inmate who has never been convicted of a sex offense or otherwise adjudicated a sex offender." Id. ¶ 43.
 [*P45]  The new procedural rights established in Labrum and Neese were not rooted in any historically recognized right to "due process" in parole hearings (or even in sentencing hearings26  ). Instead, these new rights flowed from our court's sense of fairness and equity. We framed our decision as dictated by "'critical functions' of procedural due process" found in our case law — factors that look to whether new procedures will decrease the risk of error and increase the perception of fairness in parole decisions. See id. ¶ 28. But those factors are not a test that bridles judicial discretion. They are a one-way ratchet that justifies any new set of procedures that a majority of this court decides to impose on the Parole Board in the name of due process.
 [*P46]  I dissented on these grounds in Neese.27  In so doing I expressed a shared interest in "preserving the . . . 'safe and effective administration of the prison system.'" Id. ¶ 176 (Lee, A.C.J., dissenting). But I emphasized that we have a ready "means" of doing so — in "respect[ing] the traditional role of the Parole Board" and the legislature in "adopting rules of procedure in this field," and "leav[ing] the limits of the Due Process Clause to the procedures historically understood to be guaranteed by the constitution." Id. And I lamented the fact that Neese not only departed from the original understanding of due process but also failed to provide a transparent test or standard that explained our decision.
 [*P47]  My concerns stand. The Neese opinion provides no "workable legal standard" that explains the basis for constitutionalizing new procedural rules to impose on the Parole Board. Id. ¶ 141. It just gives a "circular confirmation for whatever procedure a majority of this court may deem appropriate." Id.
 [*P48]  Today the court declines to extend Neese beyond its specific facts. And I endorse the decision to halt any further extensions of our precedent in this area. I write separately, however, to note that today's decision reinforces the concerns that I raised in Neese and confirms that the proper course of action is to repudiate Neese and return to the originalist first principles of due process set forth in my dissent in that case.
 [*P49]  The majority cites two principal grounds for refusing to extend the procedures established in Neese to the facts of this case. First, the court suggests that we have already decided the question presented. It says that the Neese procedures apply only to someone who has never been "'adjudicated a sex offender,'" supra ¶ 27 (the phrase at issue in Neese, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 25, 416 P.3d 663), and asserts that Blanke has in fact "been adjudicated a sex offender," supra ¶ 28. Second, the court contends that the due process considerations identified in Neese — whether additional procedures would "increase the accuracy of the Parole Board's decision[- making]" and "further the appearance of fairness in the Parole Board's decision-making" — counsel against extending Neese. Supra ¶ 29.
 [*P50]  But the decision today is not dictated by anything set forth in Neese — not by our articulation of the holding, and not by our announcement of any governing standard.28  Here, as in Neese, we are making a policy decision. We are concluding that the facts of this case are less sympathetic than the facts in Neese, and thus insufficient to justify extending the reach of our newly constitutionalized parole procedures.
 [*P51]  Like the majority, I would hold that there is no basis for a decision granting Blanke the right to call witnesses (and avail himself of the other rights we announced in Neese) in his parole hearing.— a But I would base that decision on a determination — explained in detail in my dissent in Neese and elaborated further below — that there is no due process ground that justifies this court taking over a policymaking function that has long been vested in the Parole Board and subject to oversight by the legislature.
 [*P52]  In the paragraphs below I first show that our articulation of the holding in Neese does not resolve the question presented today. I then demonstrate that a serious application of the Neese factors would lead to a decision in Blanke's favor. And I conclude by explaining why this court can and should repudiate Neese and place these sensitive decisions back in the hands of the Parole Board.
I
 [*P53]  The majority first asserts that the concerns that drove the Neese decision are not present in the case before us. It says that Neese decided "what procedural protections the Parole Board must respect before it determines that someone who has never before been adjudicated a sex offender is one and effectively conditions his early release on his participation in sex offender treatment." Supra ¶ 23 (quoting Neese v. Utah Bd. of Pardons & Parole, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 25, 416 P.3d 663 (internal quotation marks omitted)). And it holds that Neese does not apply to Blanke's situation because "[u]nlike the Neese inmate, Blanke has been adjudicated a sex offender." Supra ¶ 28.
 [*P54]  But this is pure ipse dixit — a preference for a given policy outcome cloaked in a conclusory statement that the premise holds because we say it does. It is not at all clear that Neese provides that Blanke "has been adjudicated a sex offender." Nor is that apparent from the Utah criminal code or the record in this case. This is a question of first impression.
 [*P55]  Neese held that a person is a "sex offender" if he committed an offense that justifies a Board decision to "condition[] his early release on his participation in sex offender treatment." Neese, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 25, 416 P.3d 663. But the Utah Code does not regulate the Board's authority to impose such conditions on early release. And it certainly doesn't define what counts as a "sex offense" for these purposes. It is silent on the matter.29  The same goes for our case law, which reflects the longstanding discretion of the Board to impose the terms and conditions that it sees fit.
 [*P56]  Neese likewise gave little guidance on what it means to have "been adjudicated a sex offender." It told us only that a defendant who has been subject to trial and mistrial on a count of "forcible sodomy," id. ¶ 2, cannot be deemed to have been "adjudicated" guilty of the kind of offense that leads to a requirement of sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release, id. ¶ 25. But that decision in no way dictates an answer to the question presented in this case. There is no a priori, objective sense in which we can conclusively say that Blanke has been "adjudicated a sex offender" — the kind of offender that justifies the Board in conditioning his early release on the completion of sex offender treatment. The standard certainly wasn't articulated in Neese.30  And Blanke credibly argues that at least some of the differences between his case and Neese's support the conclusion that he deserves additional procedure at least as much as Neese did.
 [*P57]  Neese was charged with and tried on a crime our code classifies as a "sexual offense."31  And the crime in question required proof of a non-consensual "sexual act . . . involving the genitals of one individual and the mouth or anus of another individual."32  He also had the opportunity to defend against that charge in a full-blown criminal trial — with all the procedural rights that accompany such a proceeding (including the right to call, confront, and cross-examine witnesses).
 [*P58]  Blanke's case is different in several respects. But many of the differences cut in his favor — and cannot themselves justify distinguishing Neese. The charges against Blanke (on which he pleaded guilty) were for kidnapping and attempted child kidnapping. Neither of those crimes is classified as a "sexual offense" in the code or requires proof of a non-consensual "sexual act." On these grounds, Blanke may be in a stronger position than Neese to complain about the Parole Board branding him a "sex offender" and prescribing sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release.
 [*P59]  Granted, Neese was never convicted of the conduct for which he was required to undergo sex offender treatment. But neither was Blanke. He was convicted of attempted child kidnapping and kidnapping, crimes that, again, were neither classified as "sexual offenses" nor required proof of a non-consensual "sexual act."
 [*P60]  The majority dismisses these arguments, noting that the crime of attempted child kidnapping "was a registerable offense under Utah's sex offender registration statute" at the time of Blanke's guilty plea, supra ¶ 28, and asserting that "there is a correlation between attempted child kidnapping and sex offenses," supra ¶ 28 n.12. On these bases, the court concludes that Blanke "has been adjudicated a sex offender." Supra ¶ 28. It also notes that Blanke did not object to allegations in a presentence report that he engaged in conduct that "constituted the crime of unlawful sexual intercourse" (statutory rape) under Utah Code section 76-5-401 (1983). Supra ¶ 34. And because that conduct "constituted a crime that would have required him to register as a sex offender had he been convicted of it," supra ¶ 34, the court suggests that Blanke's circumstances fall outside the holding of Neese.
 [*P61]  But again, there is nothing in Neese that dictates this result. We might wish to treat Blanke as a "sex offender" of the sort that may justly be required to undergo sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release on parole. But that crucial definition of "sex offender" is nowhere stated in Neese and nowhere provided in our statutes governing parole. This is a policy decision that we are making based on the facts of this particular case. Attempted child kidnapping is neither classified as a sexual offense nor requires proof of a non-consensual sexual act. The same goes for kidnapping. And although there was conduct mentioned in the presentence report in the kidnapping case that could have constituted a sexual offense if it had been charged, see supra ¶ 34, there was no charge and thus no conviction. If we justify the Board's decision based on the fact that Blanke could have been convicted of statutory rape and required to register as a sex offender, Blanke is in a worse position than Neese was — he is being required to undergo treatment for conduct for which he was never even charged or tried, let alone convicted. Clearly, then, Blanke's failure to "object" to the allegation in the presentence report does not show that he has been "adjudicated a sex offender" under Neese.
 [*P62]  I am not suggesting that Blanke has a clear-cut case under Neese. I am just noting that Neese does not tell us who counts as the kind of "sex offender" that the Board may require to participate in sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release. I have cited a difference between this case and Neese that seems to make Blanke's case the more sympathetic one — that Neese was charged with and tried on a crime classified as a "sexual offense" and requiring proof of a non-consensual "sexual act," while Blanke was charged with and pleaded guilty to crimes with neither of those features. The majority, by contrast, cites differences that seem to cut in the opposite direction — that Neese pleaded guilty only to charges of obstruction of justice, theft, and burglary, while Blanke pleaded guilty to one "registrable offense" and failed to contest allegations of misconduct that would have constituted another. Fair enough. But none of this tells us whether Blanke has been "adjudicated" of the kind of sex offense that should require him to participate in sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release.
 [*P63]  This is because there is no law governing the imposition of such a precondition. Again, this is unsurprising because these decisions have long been matters of discretion for the Parole Board. We cut back on that discretion in Neese when we held that a person charged with and tried on a sex offense resulting in a mistrial could not be subjected to sex offender treatment by the Parole Board without additional procedures mandated by this court. And in so ruling we characterized the imposition of such a condition as a determination by the Board that an inmate is an "adjudicated . . . sex offender." But that does not tell us whether a person charged only with attempted child kidnapping and kidnapping has been "adjudicated" of the kind of "sex offense" that should require him to go through sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release on parole.
 [*P64]  The court is thus making a new policy decision in ruling that "the Parole Board may classify an inmate as a sex offender" (and therefore require sex offender treatment as a condition of early release on parole) "when the inmate is required to register as a sex offender," supra ¶ 28 n.12, or when an inmate fails to deny conduct that would have constituted a registrable offense (if he had been charged and convicted), supra ¶ 33. Nothing in Neese, and certainly nothing in the statutes and regulations governing parole, dictates the court's decision.
II
 [*P65]  The majority also insists that its decision follows from the legal "paradigm" set forth in Neese v. Utah Board of Pardons & Parole, 2017 UT 89, 416 P.3d 663. Supra ¶ 25. Citing the "'critical functions' of due process" identified in that case, the court says that "more procedural protections here" would neither "substantially increase the accuracy of the Parole Board's decision that Blanke is a sex offender" nor "substantially further the appearance of fairness." Supra ¶ 29.
 [*P66]  If we apply the plain language of Neese — which does not require that procedures do anything "substantially"33  — I can't see how that could be so. It would be a rare case indeed where additional precautions would not increase accuracy, and an even rarer one where such safeguards would not enhance the inmate's "reasonable," see supra ¶¶ 29, 36, perception of fairness. See Neese, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 141, 416 P.3d 663 (Lee, A.C.J., dissenting) ("Any additional procedure, after all, can be said to 'minimiz[e] error' and 'preserv[e] the integrity of the [parole] process.'" (alterations in original)). And this does not strike me as such a case.
 [*P67]  Even if we apply the majority's new and improved "substantially increases" standard, it is not clear to me that Blanke should lose. The Neese factors, after all, are "not a legal test." Id. ¶ 182. They are just a recitation of the "benefits of additional procedure." Id. And when our test cites "only the benefits — the upsides — of additional procedure[,] we will have a one-way ratchet that will always result in more constitutionally required procedure."34 Id. This "mode of reasoning" thus "provides no stopping point," except in any limits that may be found in the fluid and opaque policy preferences of a "majority of the court." See id. ¶ 184. That is the only real limit that I can find in the Neese framework — whatever a majority of this court thinks will increase ("substantially" or otherwise) accuracy and the perception of fairness. And I think we need to own it if that is our standard. See id. ¶ 147 (noting that if our due process standard is simply "anything a majority of us deem[s] necessary is required," "we should say so" (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 [*P68]  I flesh out these concerns below. First I show that the Neese concern for accuracy seems to cut in Blanke's favor. Then I make a parallel point about the concern for an inmate's perception of fairness.
A
 [*P69]  The court says that Blanke's requested procedures will not "substantially" enhance accuracy because he "already had the opportunity to 'meaningfully present evidence'" of relevance to the parole decision in earlier sentencing proceedings. Supra ¶ 29. Blanke had counsel in those proceedings and was aware of the contents of the presentence report. Supra ¶ 36. And the court notes that he could have but failed to challenge the State's allegations against him. Supra ¶ 36.
 [*P70]  I can't see how this means that the accuracy of the Parole Board's decision would not be "substantially" enhanced by additional procedure. In the attempted child kidnapping case, the presentence report would have told Blanke that he was charged with an offense that would require him to register as one convicted of that crime. In the kidnapping case, the presentence report would have told him that the allegations could have led to a separate charge of "unlawful sexual intercourse" under Utah Code section 76-5-401 (1983). But in neither case would Blanke have known that he needed to challenge the allegations to preserve procedural rights in objecting to sex offender treatment as a precondition of his early release on parole. The majority does not contend otherwise. It simply says it is enough that Blanke "had the chance to refute the presentence report," supra ¶ 35, "while being represented by counsel," supra ¶ 36.
 [*P71]  But the mere existence of a previous "chance" to put on evidence does not defeat Blanke's right to additional procedure under Neese. The first Neese factor simply asks whether additional procedures would "reduce the risk of error" in the Parole Board's decision-making, Neese v. Utah Bd. of Pardons & Parole, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 24, 416 P.3d 663, and additional procedure would surely help the Parole Board make a more informed decision as to whether Blanke committed an act justifying a requirement of sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release. The majority insists that Blanke "admitted" that he committed "conduct that would have required him to register as a sex offender had he been convicted of it." Supra ¶ 34. But he didn't expressly "admit" to anything in that proceeding. He just failed to deny every allegation in a presentence report. And those remaining allegations have never been "adjudicated," at least if that means ruled on after a full and fair trial (as Neese suggests). Ultimately, moreover, there remains a significant, disputed question about what facts are sufficient to justify the imposition of a requirement of sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release. See supra ¶¶ 55-62. Surely additional procedure would aid the Parole Board's decision-making to some degree. And that is all that the first Neese factor requires.35 
 [*P72]  The majority's contrary conclusion cannot be reconciled with our opinion in Neese. After all, in that case the inmate had been openly charged with forcible sodomy and afforded the full range of procedural protections available at trial. See Neese, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 2, 416 P.3d 663. True, the trial did not result in a conviction; but neither did it result in an acquittal. The result was a mistrial, id., and the record of the trial would have been available to the Parole Board when Neese sought early release on the lesser charges on which he pleaded guilty and was eventually sentenced. So if the question is just whether an inmate has had a prior "chance" or "opportunity" to voice his opposition to a sex offense allegation that the Board is using to justify a requirement of sex offender treatment, then surely Neese had that. The majority cannot claim that Blanke's opportunity was somehow better than Neese's.
 [*P73]  When Blanke pleaded guilty to kidnapping and attempted child kidnapping, he would have had no notice that he was agreeing to subject himself to sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release. He would have had little, if any, incentive to contest the allegations on those grounds. Neese, by contrast, knew that he had been charged with a crime classified as a "sexual offense" and requiring proof of a non-consensual "sexual act." See supra ¶ 58. And that knowledge arguably put him on greater notice that the Parole Board might require sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release.
 [*P74]  The majority seeks to avoid this problem by noting that Neese "steadfastly maintain[ed] that he was innocent" while Blanke effectively "admitted" to unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor. Supra ¶ 35 (citation omitted). But the first Neese factor does not ask whether the inmate seeking additional procedural protections previously admitted to the conduct the Board cites as its reason for requiring sex offender treatment. It asks whether those additional protections would increase the objective accuracy of the Parole Board's decision-making. See Neese, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 25, 416 P.3d 663. And once we have held that the Board's accuracy is improved by the right to call more witnesses in addition to those called at a previous trial, we cannot hold that accuracy is not enhanced by the same right in a case where the inmate never called any witnesses and had little incentive to do so.
B
 [*P75]  The second Neese factor points toward the same conclusion. The majority says that Blanke "cannot reasonably think it unfair" that the Parole Board is requiring sex offender treatment as a precondition of his early release on parole based on (a) a conviction of an offense (attempted child kidnapping) requiring registration as a sex offender, or (b) allegations in a presentence report evidencing an uncharged crime (of "unlawful sexual intercourse") that were left unchallenged in a prior sentencing proceeding but also would have required registration. Supra ¶¶ 29, 36. But Blanke clearly does "think it unfair," as evidenced by his resilient prosecution of his case in both the court of appeals and this court. And if pure gut-level "fairness" is the test, I can hardly blame him.
 [*P76]  In Neese we highlighted a broad range of harms and stigmas that result when an inmate is labeled a "sex offender" in the prison system. Neese v. Utah Bd. of Pardons & Parole, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 31, 416 P.3d 663 (explaining, inter alia, the invasive nature of sex offender treatment and research showing that inmates classified as sex offenders are more likely to be physically and sexually abused). And we imposed new procedural requirements on parole decisions based on our concern for the reliance interests of a person in Neese's circumstances. We emphasized that Neese could not have known that allegations "not logically implicit in the factual basis of the[] allocution" leading to his guilty plea could "come roaring back at [a] parole hearing and result in a sentence decades longer than the sentence all parties contemplated based on the sentencing matrix at the time." Id. ¶ 33.
 [*P77]  If we really believed all that, we would extend the protections established in Neese to Blanke. When Blanke pleaded guilty to attempted child kidnapping, he could not have known that the registration requirement for that offense would "come roaring back" and result in a requirement of sex offender treatment as a precondition to his early release — a precondition that will significantly extend the sentence that everyone would have contemplated "based on the sentencing matrix at the time." See id. Nor could he have anticipated that an attempted child kidnapping plea would lead to his classification in prison as a sex offender — and all the various harms and stigmas we warned of in Neese.
 [*P78]  The majority attempts to skirt this issue by citing statistics that show an "apparent significant correlation between child kidnapping and child sex offenses," and by noting that the Utah Legislature "saw" such a correlation when it required registration for child kidnapping offenses. Supra ¶ 31. There may indeed be a correlation. But that is not the question. The question is whether there is a sufficient correlation to justify the Parole Board's decision to require sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release for inmates convicted of child kidnapping offenses. Blanke could not have anticipated the imposition of such a condition — at least not any more than Neese could have anticipated that he would be subject to that condition when he secured a mistrial on a forcible sodomy charge and pleaded guilty to lesser, nonsexual crimes. At bottom, the question in both cases is a policy question — one long left to the Parole Board and legislature, but seized by this court in Neese. And to the extent the answer to that policy question turns on the inmate's perception of fairness, I see little room for the court's conclusion that Blanke "cannot reasonably think" the Parole Board's process in this case as "unfair" as the one we condemned in Neese.
 [*P79]  The same goes for the majority's reliance on Blanke's failure to refute allegations in the kidnapping presentence report. The majority notes that the allegations in that report evidenced the uncharged crime of "unlawful sexual intercourse" under Utah Code section 76-5-401 (1983), a crime that "required registration as a sex offender." Supra ¶ 34. And it emphasizes that Blanke never "refute[d]" the allegations of sexual intercourse in the presentence report, but only "denied having 'raped and sodomized'" the victim. Supra ¶ 35. In the majority's view, this establishes that Blanke's "sexual intercourse with a fifteen-year-old was an 'undisputed background fact[].'" Supra ¶ 35 (alteration in original) (citation omitted). With this in mind, the court concludes that Blanke "cannot reasonably think it unfair" for the Parole Board to accept that "fact" as a basis for requiring sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release on parole. Supra ¶ 36.
 [*P80]  I disagree. Blanke was never even charged with "unlawful sexual intercourse." At the time of his plea allocution on the charge of kidnapping, moreover, he could not have known that allegations that could sustain such an uncharged offense would "come roaring back," Neese, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 33, 416 P.3d 663, to substantially increase the sentence that he otherwise expected (and no doubt took into account when deciding to plead guilty). At that time, Blanke would have seen no correlation between a failure to oppose these allegations and the extent of his eventual prison time — not to mention his classification as a sex offender in prison and exposure to all the stigmas and harms associated with that classification.
 [*P81]  So if we really believe that the answer to whether more procedure is required turns on an "inmate's perception of fairness," id. ¶ 25, we should rule in Blanke's favor. The Neese factors ultimately can point in only one direction. If we take them seriously here, we need to recognize the strength of Blanke's position.
III
 [*P82]  None of the above should be interpreted as an endorsement of the standards set forth in Neese or of Blanke's position on appeal. I stand by the view set forth in my dissenting opinion in Neese. I find the standards laid out in Neese "as fuzzy and unworkable as they are unmoored from history." Neese v. Utah Bd. of Pardons & Parole, 2017 UT 89, ¶ 185, 416 P.3d 663 (Lee, A.C.J., dissenting). Absent an originalist basis for constitutionalizing our preferred procedure for parole proceedings, I would reject the Neese framework and leave the matter to those whose discretion and expertise have long governed in this sensitive field — the Parole Board, with oversight by the legislature.
 [*P83]  The majority contends that we should not repudiate the framework set forth in Neese because the parties "have not asked us to do so" and we have declined to order supplemental briefing on the matter. See supra ¶ 11 n.6. But the parties do not dictate when we revisit our precedents.36 See supra ¶ 11 n.6. And while it is wise practice to seek the parties' input through supplemental briefing,37  there is no hard-and-fast rule that we do so, as the majority acknowledges.38 See supra ¶ 11 n.6 (recognizing that "we have the power to revisit precedent at any time" even if it is our "preferred practice" to order supplemental briefing "if we are considering overturning or reformulating precedent").
 [*P84]  Today's majority may prefer to decide this case without any briefing on whether and to what extent we should reformulate or repudiate our decision in Neese. That is the court's prerogative. But having made that decision, the majority is in no position to fault me for explaining why I think we should do so. And the court is likewise in no position to blame the decision not to reconsider Neese on a lack of briefing — the lack of such briefing is a result of its own decision.
 [*P85]  My proposed approach, moreover, does not require an outright reversal of the judgment in the Neese decision. It just requires us to own the unworkability of the standards set forth in that decision and to announce our intention to decline to extend it any further. And there is no question that we have the power to do that. As the majority explains, there is no single category of "overruling." See supra ¶ 11 n.6. A decision to clarify, refine, or reconcile our past precedent is not the same thing as a decision to flatly reverse a prior judgment. In the latter circumstance, we are more openly implicating the central underpinnings of the doctrine of stare decisis — reliance interests of parties and the public.39 See Eldridge v. Johndrow, 2015 UT 21, ¶ 35, 345 P.3d 553 (explaining that in deciding whether to overrule a case we consider "the extent to which people's reliance on the precedent would create injustice or hardship if it were overturned"). But these concerns are less obvious (and sometimes not at all present) when we are just clarifying or refining our precedent,40  and even less so when we are just limiting a prior decision to its facts.41  That kind of move is entirely consistent with the notion of stare decisis — Latin for "stand[ing]" by what is "decided." Stare decisis, Black's Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019). We clearly stand by what is decided when we preserve the square holding of a prior decision. And nothing in the doctrine requires us to take statements in our prior decisions and extend them to their logical extreme.
 [*P86]  The upshot is that we do not need to be asked by the parties — or order the parties to chime in — before we can decide to limit our precedent. The discretion to refine and curtail the reach of our prior precedents is central to the judicial function of an appellate court. It is a core element of what we do. And that discretion is not cabined by the terms of the parties' briefing — or our own decision not to order supplemental briefing.
IV
 [*P87]  For these reasons I endorse the majority's decision to stop short of any further intrusion into the longstanding prerogatives of the Parole Board. But I lament the effect of the court's opinion on the coherence of our law in this field. And I suggest that it is time to end our ongoing, standardless extension of problematic precedent.
 [*P88]  Neese seemed to mandate an ever-expanding set of procedural requirements for parole proceedings involving a requirement of sex offender treatment as a precondition of early release. But Blanke now stands as a reminder that new procedures may not be required when a majority of this court decides to impose a limit. And this will leave the Parole Board and lower courts without any guideposts for what procedures are necessary going forward except their best guess at what a majority of this court might find "reasonably" fair.
 [*P89]  We should avoid this dissonance and confusion by returning to the originalist first principles set forth in my dissenting opinion in Neese. We can do so here without running afoul of the doctrine of stare decisis. That doctrine calls for respect for precedent in the interest of preserving stability in our law. But as I have explained, we are always free to stop extending our decisions. And in any case, our law as it stands is anything but stable. Today's decision leaves inmates and the Parole Board more confused about what our precedent is in this area. This uncertain state leaves us free to revise and clarify our law. See Eldridge v. Johndrow, 2015 UT 21, ¶¶ 43-44, 345 P.3d 553 (arguing that we should overturn precedent that is highly "fact-intensive" and leaves lower courts "without guidance"). I would do so in a manner that restores the original deference given to the Parole Board and the legislature in this important field.

 

