 in part and dissenting in part:
 [*P125]  I agree with and concur in much of the majority opinion in this complex case. But I respectfully disagree with the court's decision to reverse and remand to allow the parties to present extrinsic evidence on the question of "what is required to bring the Note current under the 20 percent default interest provision." Supra ¶ 59. Unlike the majority, I find no "ambiguity" in this provision sufficient to open the door to extrinsic evidence. Instead I would conclude that the default interest provision applies to any and all outstanding debts under the Note and that these debts must be paid in order for the Note to be "brought current."
 [*P126]  This strikes me as the better interpretation of the terms of the parties' agreement. And because this question can be adequately resolved on the basis of the written agreement I would hold that there is no basis for a remand.
 [*P127]  My disagreement with the majority highlights an important ambiguity lurking in the background of our analysis in a case like this one. The ambiguity concerns the very notion of contract ambiguity—or in other words ambiguity about what it means for competing parties both to offer a "reasonable" interpretation of the contract provision in question. Our cases have never been very clear about the nature of ambiguity sufficient to open the door to extrinsic evidence. Put differently, we have never said what it means for both sides to have a "reasonable" interpretation. I would clarify this important point of contract law doctrine here. I would do so by holding that a contract is "ambiguous" enough to allow a court to consider extrinsic evidence if and only if the parties' competing interpretations of a contract are equally (or at least roughly equally) plausible. And I would conclude that the Note in this case is not ambiguous in this sense, but is better interpreted as requiring a default interest payment on any and all outstanding debts payable under the Note (and thus necessary for it to be "brought current").
 [*P128]  In the paragraphs below I first set forth the need and basis for the clarification in our law that I propose. Then I respond to the majority's criticisms of my approach, including its puzzling assertion that the doctrine of stare decisis somehow bars my bid to clarify an element of our law that has never been defined but leaves the majority free to make the clarification that it prefers. See supra ¶ 54 n.39. And I conclude by explaining why I think the terms of the Note at issue here are not sufficiently ambiguous to warrant a decision to open the door to the presentation of extrinsic evidence.
I
 [*P129]  We have long said that a provision of a contract is ambiguous if "it is capable of more than one reasonable interpretation because of uncertain meanings of terms, missing terms, or other facial deficiencies." Meadow Valley Contractors, Inc. v. State Dep't of Transp., 2011 UT 35, ¶ 64, 266 P.3d 671 (emphasis added) (quoting Glenn v. Reese, 2009 UT 80, ¶ 10, 225 P.3d 185), abrogated on other grounds by Mounteer Enters., Inc. v. Homeowners Ass'n for the Colony of White Pine Canyon, 2018 UT 23, 422 P.3d 809. Yet we have never been very clear about what this means.
 [*P130]  We have emphasized that it is not enough that two parties offer competing interpretations of a contract provision. R&R Energies v. Mother Earth Indus., Inc., 936 P.2d 1068, 1074 (Utah 1997). Thus, we have stated that each competing interpretation must be "reasonable"—or "tenable." See Plateau Mining Co. v. Utah Div. of State Lands & Forestry, 802 P.2d 720, 725 (Utah 1990) ("To demonstrate ambiguity, the contrary positions of the parties must each be tenable."). And we have underscored the need to consider the "contract as a whole" in assessing this question—"[e]ach contract provision . . . in relation to all of the others." Utah Valley Bank v. Tanner, 636 P.2d 1060, 1061-62 (Utah 1981). Yet we have never been very clear about what it means for two competing interpretations to be "reasonable" or "tenable."
 [*P131]  This is a significant ambiguity. A judicial determination of ambiguity opens the door to extrinsic evidence of the intent of the parties to a contract—and, eventually, to the possible application of a canon of construction (like the canon of construing ambiguities against the drafter). See supra ¶ 56 (quoting Meadow Valley Contractors, 2011 UT 35, ¶ 64). Such a determination is likely to be a matter of great consequence to the parties. When a court opens the door to extrinsic evidence it substantially increases the cost of resolving a dispute over the meaning of a contract provision. See Omri Ben-Shahar & Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Interpreting Contracts Via Surveys and Experiments, 92 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1753, 1762-63, 1757-58 (2017); Alan Schwartz & Robert E. Scott, Contract Interpretation Redux, 119 Yale L.J. 926, 953, 963 (2010). And, all else being equal, we can assume that parties to a contract will prefer quick, inexpensive means of resolving contract disputes. Schwartz & Scott, supra at 944-47.
 [*P132]  All else may not be equal. The decision to open the door to extrinsic evidence may produce not just costs but also benefits—by enhancing the accuracy of a judicial decision (in accurately assessing the contracting parties' intent). Id. at 930 (explaining that courts can often "minimize interpretive error by hearing all relevant and material evidence"). And it could make good sense to open the door to extrinsic evidence in contract cases if and when this benefit outweighs the cost of more drawn-out litigation. See id. at 946.
 [*P133]  This is an important policy question that drives some points of conflict in the law of contract interpretation. When courts embrace a hard "parol evidence rule" or "plain meaning" canon of contract interpretation they are implicitly concluding that the adjudication costs of opening the door to extrinsic evidence outweigh any benefits in the form of improving accuracy of judicial decision-making. See Ben-Shahar & Strahilevitz, supra at 1762. This is the so-called "New York" rule of contract interpretation.107  The contrary approach is sometimes referred to as the "California rule."108  It seems premised, at least in part, on a contrary determination—that the benefits of more accurately assessing the parties' intent are sufficient to justify the increase in costs associated with opening the door to extrinsic evidence.
 [*P134]  Our Utah cases have embraced the New York approach—at least in part. See Tangren Family Tr. v. Tangren, 2008 UT 20, ¶ 11, 182 P.3d 326 ("[I]f a contract is integrated, parol evidence is admissible only to clarify ambiguous terms; it is 'not admissible to vary or contradict the clear and unambiguous terms of the contract.'" (quoting Hall v. Process Instruments & Control, Inc., 890 P.2d 1024, 1026-27 (Utah 1995)); Daines v. Vincent, 2008 UT 51, ¶ 25, 190 P.3d 1269 ("[B]efore permitting recourse to parol evidence, a court must make a determination of facial ambiguity."); Peterson v. Sunrider Corp., 2002 UT 43, ¶ 18, 48 P.3d 918 ("If the language of the contract is unambiguous, the intention of the parties may be determined as a matter of law based on the language of the agreement.").
 [*P135]  Notwithstanding these important holdings, we have not yet resolved a related question that is lurking beneath the surface in a case like this one—what do we mean by "ambiguity" or competing "reasonable" or "tenable" interpretations?109  Our cases have used a range of different terms in describing the operative standard. See supra ¶ 55 n.42. Without some clarification of the nature of this standard, we perpetuate a risk of arbitrary applications of an important threshold standard in contract interpretation.
 [*P136]  We can, and should, eliminate this ambiguity about "ambiguity" in contract interpretation. I would do so by stating that we find ambiguity sufficient to open the door to extrinsic evidence only where the parties' competing interpretations are of equal (or at least roughly equal) plausibility. Put differently, I would say that we look to extrinsic evidence only as a sort of "tie-breaker"—to resolve very close calls on the best interpretation of the four corners of a written contract.110 
 [*P137]  This approach would minimize the risk of arbitrary application of the law. It would also streamline the process of contract dispute resolution in a manner that is likely reflective of the preferences of contracting parties. See Schwartz & Scott, supra at 944-47.
 [*P138]  A party who enters into a written contract will not likely be in a position to predict whether the eventual use of extrinsic evidence will help or hurt its cause in an anticipated dispute about contract meaning. Contracting parties thus are likely to prefer streamlined rules of interpretation that tend to limit review to the four corners of the contract. This is more than a theoretical proposition. It seems amply borne out by empirical evidence—in the fact that parties overwhelmingly go out of their way to direct courts to ignore extrinsic evidence and to consider only the terms of their written agreement, and (relatedly) opt for New York law over California law in forum-selection clauses.111 
 [*P139]  Our contract law should reflect our best assessment of the contracting parties' likely preferences on the governing rules of contract interpretation. This is an important function of gap-filler rules in contract law. See Schwartz & Scott, supra at 941, 957. If we think it likely that contracting parties will prefer streamlined rules of interpretation (as I do), our law should reflect this background rule. The parties to a contract may then draft around the rule if they prefer a different approach. Id. at 944; Ian Ayres & Robert Gertner, Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts: An Economic Theory of Default Rules, 99 Yale L.J. 87, 87 (1989) ("Default rules fill the gaps in incomplete contracts; they govern unless the parties contract around them."). And our law can then defer to their contrary view.
 [*P140]  I would embrace such an approach here. And I would accordingly adopt a clarifying—and limiting—notion of the kind of "ambiguity" sufficient to open the door to extrinsic evidence in Utah.
II
 [*P141]  The majority criticizes my proposed clarification of our law on three principal grounds. First, it claims that the doctrine of stare decisis somehow bars us from clarifying an ambiguous tenet of our case law. Second, it asserts that my proposed standard is no clearer than the majority's. And third, it contends that the policy grounds for my approach will not always hold. I find none of these critiques persuasive.
A
 [*P142]  The majority places great weight on the doctrine of stare decisis. It accuses me of "brush[ing] aside sixty years of our caselaw" and of urging a "significant departure from our longstanding approach to contract interpretation." Supra ¶¶ 54 & 55 n.42. But this critique is puzzling on several counts.
 [*P143]  First, our precedent is either silent or inconsistent on the question that I am proposing to clarify. And nothing in the law of stare decisis forecloses a clarification of an unclear body of case law.
 [*P144]  The majority concedes the lack of clarity in our case law. At one point it admits that "we have used the term 'reasonable' repeatedly for decades without defining the term further." Supra ¶ 55. And elsewhere it acknowledges that we have also used an alternative term—"plausible"—in identifying the threshold for ambiguity in this field. Supra ¶ 54 n.39. That term has also remained undefined in our case law.
 [*P145]  Our cases are at best silent on what it means for two competing interpretations of a contract to be "reasonable" or "plausible." That alone should be enough to defeat the applicability of the doctrine of stare decisis. If we have failed to define an operative term for decades we can hardly be foreclosed from doing so as a matter of stare decisis. That notion of stare decisis would make no sense. It would say that our past failure to elucidate the meaning of an undefined term in our precedent precludes us from ever doing so going forward. That cannot be right. See In re Adoption of Baby B., 2012 UT 35, ¶ 60 n.23, 308 P.3d 382 (explaining that a key policy undergirding the principle of stare decisis is "reinforced by a decision that clarifies ambiguities in past opinions").
 [*P146]  But silence is the lesser of the two evils present in our case law. Our precedents are also inconsistent. As Judge Connors notes, a standard of plausibility seems quite a bit lower than a standard of reasonableness. Compare infra ¶ 178 n.122 (Connors, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (providing definitions of the word "plausible"), with Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1892 (2002) (defining "reasonable" as "being in agreement with right thinking or right judgment; not conflicting with reason; not absurd"). The "more than conjecture" standard used in our caselaw seems even further removed. Infra ¶ 148 n.113; see Webster's Third New International Dictionary 479 (2002) (defining "conjecture" as "an inference or conclusion drawn or deduced by surmise or guesswork"). If it is enough for both of two interpretations of a contract to be "more than conjecture," the door will be open wide to the admissibility of extrinsic evidence.
 [*P147]  Our law as it currently stands is a grab bag. A judge who prefers to enforce a careful limit on the admissibility of extrinsic evidence can do so under the notion of "reasonableness" that I have proposed. But no judge is bound by that standard. If the judge prefers to open a wider door to extrinsic evidence she can cite the "more than conjecture" standard. These two notions of reasonableness cannot peacefully coexist. And the doctrine of stare decisis surely does not foreclose us from resolving the tension in our case law.112 
 [*P148]  The majority seeks to avoid this problem by equating the terms "plausible" and "reasonable" going forward. Citing some language in some of our opinions, the court insists that "we have treated" the term "plausible" as if it "had roughly the same meaning as the term 'reasonable.'" Supra ¶ 54 n.39. To support this assertion, the majority notes that the terms are often used near each other in our opinions. That's true. But it does not follow that the two terms are synonymous. There is good reason to believe that a plausibility standard is lower than a reasonableness standard. Again I think that follows from the text of our opinions and from the ordinary meaning of "plausible."113 See supra ¶¶ 144, 146.
 [*P149]  The majority's response to this problem, moreover, just underscores the need for clarification in this area. Ultimately all the majority is really saying is that it believes a clarification is necessary. And the clarification it selectively chooses is that "plausible" essentially means "reasonable."
 [*P150]  This leads to the second problem with the majority's stare decisis analysis. The court itself is proposing to clarify our law in this field—by saying that when we use the term "plausible" we really mean "reasonable" (while still stopping short of defining the latter term). Having done so, however, the majority is in no position to criticize me for proposing further clarification. I don't think the law of stare decisis forecloses the need to clarify an unclear or unworkable legal standard. See Carter v. Lehi City, 2012 UT 2, ¶ 6, 269 P.3d 141 (explaining that "[a] decision to clarify unworkable precedent does not undermine but advances" a key goal of stare decisis). But surely no version of that doctrine allows the majority to advance whatever points of clarification it favors while dismissing my further clarification as an unceremonious "brush[ing] aside" of "sixty years of our case law."114 
 B
 [*P151]  The majority also expresses confusion or frustration with the standard that I propose. It says that I either fail to "clarify what a reasonable interpretation would be," supra ¶ 55 n.42, or that I "exclude[]" "any consideration of whether" two competing interpretations are "reasonable," supra ¶ 54 n.41. But neither point correctly characterizes my approach. And the majority's critiques reveal the circularity of its own standard.
 [*P152]  I propose to speak directly to what I see as missing from the standard set forth in our cases—to what it means for there to be two "reasonable" interpretations of a contract provision. I suggest that the clearest—and best—way to speak to that question is to say that two interpretations of a contract are both "reasonable" when they are of at least roughly equal plausibility. See supra ¶ 136. I suppose it's true that we have "never applied" this standard in our past cases. Supra ¶ 55 n.42. But it misses my whole point to highlight this as a bug in my theory. This is my theory's central feature. And it is built on the idea that we have never spoken specifically to what it means for two interpretations to be "reasonable"—and need to do so here.
 [*P153]  The point is not that our courts should refuse to decide whether two competing interpretations are "reasonable," supra ¶ 54 n.41—much less that we should "disregard one reasonable interpretation of a contract" in favor of an alternative interpretation that the court deems "preferable," supra ¶ 55 n.45. These formulations beg the central question—of what it means for an interpretation to be "reasonable." And I'm saying that our courts should define "reasonableness" in terms of roughly equal plausibility.
 [*P154]  Under my proposed standard, a court would determine whether two interpretations are "reasonable" by deciding whether both are roughly equally plausible interpretations of a contract. A court could reject one interpretation not by deciding that the other is "preferable" in some vague, abstract sense but by concluding that it is much less plausible than the alternative.115  My approach thus does not "expand . . . contract interpretation . . . by adding an additional step" of analysis. Supra ¶ 55 n.45. It simply represents an effort to clarify the first step in interpreting a contract—what constitutes a "reasonable" interpretation.
 [*P155]  My proposal is a move in the direction of increased transparency. The majority, by contrast, shrouds the standard of "reasonableness" in a question-begging formulation that perpetuates the risk of arbitrariness and inconsistency.
 [*P156]  The majority insists that "we have provided a consistent explanation for what constitutes a reasonable interpretation." Supra ¶ 55. It says that "a reasonable interpretation is an interpretation that cannot be ruled out . . . as one the parties could have reasonably intended." Supra ¶ 55 (emphasis added). Yet this formulation is circular. It defines reasonableness in terms of what is reasonable. That leaves the matter undefined. It does not tell us how reasonable a competing interpretation must be, or what it means to be reasonable.
 [*P157]  Perhaps that question can never be answered with mathematical certainty. But we can try to give it some discernible content. That is my proposal. And a responsive critique that says reasonable means reasonable is no answer; it is a guarantee of arbitrariness.116 
 [*P158]  As judges we are responsible to make our decisions in accordance with the rule of law. We fail to do so when we take an "I know it when I see it" way out. See Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184, 197, 84 S. Ct. 1676, 12 L. Ed. 2d 793 (1964) (Stewart, J., concurring). Such is not law. It is an assertion of a judicial prerogative to do what's right on a case-by-case basis. And when we do that we open up the possibility—or more accurately the guarantee—that our law will mean something different in different courts in our system.
 [*P159]  Where possible, we should identify the legal rule that governs our decisions. When we decline to do so we open the door to decision-making on the basis of personal predilections or prejudices of our judges. We can and should do better.
C
 [*P160]  The majority's final critique is a response to a policy argument for the tie-breaker notion of "reasonableness" that I have identified—the logical and empirical support for the idea that contracting parties prefer streamlined rules of interpretation that tend to limit review to the four corners of the contract. See supra ¶¶ 137-38. While acknowledging this point, the majority insists that "it is not necessarily true in every case that parties would prefer a quick and inexpensive resolution over an accurate result—especially in cases involving parties who do not litigate frequently." Supra ¶ 55 n.45.
 [*P161]  I take that point. That is why I propose a rule that would function as a default. If contracting parties prefer accuracy above all else (or at least above litigation costs), they can make that clear by drafting into the contract a rule that opens a wider door to the consideration of extrinsic evidence.
 [*P162]  The majority's point, at most, is that some parties may prefer this wider door. Yet I have cited empirical support for the likely preference of a majority of contracting parties, see supra ¶ 138 n.111, and the majority has presented no basis for its contrary view.
 [*P163]  The majority, in all events, has not articulated a standard that is sensitive to the nuance that it introduces. It has not said that we should decide on the required level of reasonableness of competing contract interpretations based on an indication of the parties' appetite for expensive litigation. Indeed it has not articulated any standard at all. That seems to me the worst of all of the options before us. If the majority prefers a wider door for extrinsic evidence—if it wishes to open the door whenever the parties present plausible but not equally reasonable interpretations—then it should say so. And it should offer a reason for that standard. But unless and until it does so I do not see how the majority is in a position to criticize my proposed move in the direction of greater transparency.
 III
 [*P164]  Applying the standard set forth above, I would hold that there is no "ambiguity" in the terms of the default interest provision of the Note at issue here. The operative text of the Note states that "[i]f payment is not made within 5 days of due date the entire balance shall bear interest at a rate of 20 percent until note is brought current." The question presented is what is meant by "brought current." In the Park Defendants' view the Note may be brought current only if all payments due under the Note (all installment payments and all late fees) are made. The Bradys view this provision differently. Because the default interest provision is triggered only by a late installment payment, the Bradys insist that they can bring the Note current by making up only the late installment payments.
 [*P165]  The majority deems both interpretations "reasonable." I disagree.
 [*P166]  The Bradys' interpretation could be deemed "reasonable" if any degree of plausibility were sufficient to open the door to extrinsic evidence. But that is not how I would view the notion of "reasonableness" (or of "ambiguity"). For reasons highlighted above, I would find ambiguity only in the face of two interpretations of at least roughly equal plausibility. And here I do not find that kind of ambiguity.
 [*P167]  It is true, as the majority notes, that "[t]he phrase 'brought current' is not defined . . . in the Note." Supra ¶ 60. But that doesn't render the contract ambiguous. The default interest provision is ambiguous only if we are unable to discern the better interpretation of the terms of the contract. And I see a clear path to resolving the parties' dispute on the four corners of the Note.
 [*P168]  "[B]rought current" is not ambiguous. In this linguistic context, "current" means "belong[ing] to" the applicable "period of time," or in other words up to date.117  And an account like the one at issue here can be brought up to date only if all amounts owing are paid in full. No one would say that a debtor's account is "brought current" by a mere partial payment of amounts owing to a creditor.
 [*P169]  Here there is no question that the Bradys owed more than just late installment payments to the Parks; they also owed unpaid late fees. The Bradys' interpretation should be rejected on that basis. They do not present a reasonable construction because they fail to credit the plain language of the Note.
 [*P170]  It is true, as the majority notes, that "it is only the failure to timely pay installment payments—and not a failure to pay the other two types of payments contemplated in the Note—that triggers the 20 percent default interest." Supra ¶ 62. But that does not sustain the conclusion that "the phrase 'brought current' within the provision refers only to the payment of late installment payments." Supra ¶ 62. It indicates only that the obligation to bring the account "current" is triggered by a late installment payment.
 [*P171]  I would resolve this issue on the basis of the language of the Note. I would hold that the Bradys were required to pay any and all unpaid amounts under the Note in order to bring it "current" under the default interest provision. And I would not remand for the presentation of extrinsic evidence on this issue.118 
Judge Connors, concurring in part and dissenting in part:
 [*P172]  I concur in large part with the majority opinion. Specifically, I concur with Parts II through VII of that opinion. However, as to Part I of the majority opinion, I join Associate Chief Justice Lee's dissent in its conclusion that the district court erred when it did not find as a matter of law that the Note required the late fee to be paid to bring the Note "current." Supra ¶ 125. And yet, while I support much of the analysis in his dissenting opinion, I am not convinced that the court needs to define ambiguity as a situation where competing interpretations of a contract are roughly equal. Supra ¶ 127.
 [*P173]  Regarding Part I of the majority opinion, as a threshold matter, I disagree with the conclusion announced in Part I.A and with the analysis set forth in paragraphs 47-51. I believe the language in paragraph 36 of the court of appeals' decision was clear—it did make a legal determination that the 10 percent late fee had to be paid to bring the Note current.119  Whether the court should have made that legal determination is a different question, and one the Bradys perhaps would have asked us to reconsider had this court granted review. But it did not. Brady v. Park, 2013 UT App 97, 302 P.3d 1220, cert. denied 308 P.3d 536. Therefore, I would find that the clear language in paragraph 36 of the court of appeals' decision controls and that the district court violated the mandate rule by reaching a different conclusion.
 [*P174]  But because the majority opinion concludes that the mandate rule was not violated, we must determine what level of ambiguity is sufficient to require a court to consider extrinsic evidence to determine the intent of the parties. On this point, I agree with Associate Chief Justice Lee that there is not sufficient ambiguity in the Note at issue in this case to require consideration of extrinsic evidence to interpret the contractual language on the issue of whether the Note requires payment of the 10 percent late fee to bring the Note current. Accordingly, I do not join Part I.B of the majority opinion.
 [*P175]  However, I would not go so far as to require that the competing interpretations be roughly equal before opening the door to consideration of extrinsic evidence. To me this is not necessary to resolve the case at hand. Therefore, I do not join that aspect of Associate Chief Justice Lee's opinion.
 [*P176]  Rather, I would conclude that only one interpretation of the contract at issue in this case is objectively reasonable. And it is the same reading the court of appeals endorsed in paragraph 36 of its decision. The competing interpretation—that the Note does not require the 10 percent late fee to be paid to bring the Note current—is simply not objectively reasonable in my view.120  Therefore, rather than remand the case to the district court to consider extrinsic evidence on this issue, I would reverse with instructions to follow the only reasonable interpretation, which is that the Note requires the 10 percent late fee to be paid to bring the Note current.
 [*P177]  Finally, I would also expressly disavow language found in earlier cases121  that could be read to suggest that a proffered competing interpretation need only be "plausible"122  to support a finding of ambiguity. I would emphasize that the competing interpretations must both be objectively reasonable before an ambiguity is found.123 

 

