 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P96]  In this case we consider the effect of the Liability Reform Act (LRA), Utah Code §§ 78B-5-817 through 823, on the law of strict products liability. A key question presented is whether the act confers immunity from liability on a "passive retailer" of merchandise manufactured by others. The majority answers that question in the negative. See supra ¶ 2. It abrogates the so-called "passive retailer" doctrine adopted by the court of appeals in Sanns v. Butterfield Ford, 2004 UT App 203, 94 P.3d 301.  And it reverses the district court's decision granting defendant R.C. Willey's motion to dismiss the tort and warranty claims at issue here under the authority of that doctrine.
 [*P97]  I agree with this much of the majority's analysis. I concur in the decision to overrule the passive retailer doctrine adopted in Sanns, as I find it incompatible with the governing terms of the LRA. And I likewise concur in the court's decision to award the plaintiffs their attorney fees on their claim for rescission. See supra ¶¶ 84-93.
 [*P98]  I write separately, however, because I cannot agree with the standards for apportionment of fault announced by the majority today. I find no room in the LRA, for example, for the notion of a strict products liability scheme in which "each seller of a defective product [is] equally and strictly liable," supra ¶ 28, and in which "an 'innocent' non-manufacturer" may "recover its losses from the manufacturer by way of indemnity," supra ¶ 23. Admittedly, those are tenets of the common law doctrine of strict products liability. But in Utah that scheme has been altered by the LRA—by the statute's requirement of apportionment of "fault," which encompasses not just "any actionable breach of legal duty" but also "products liability," "strict liability," and "breach of express or implied warranty of a product." Utah Code § 78B-5-817(2).
 [*P99]  I find these and other key provisions of the LRA to override the principles of products liability set forth in the majority opinion. Thus, I would reject the passive retailer doctrine without embracing the principles of joint and several liability set forth by the court. Instead I would give effect to the LRA as written—in a manner requiring apportionment of strict products liability "fault" for any and all parties available for apportionment under the statute, resulting in a judgment foreclosing separate claims for indemnity.
 [*P100]  The standards set forth in the majority opinion may well align with sound policy in this important field. I can also see valid policy grounds for a doctrine of immunity for merely "passive" retailers like R.C. Willey. But here we have no license to make good policy. The legislature has announced the governing policy for tort cases like this one in the clear terms of the LRA. And we are bound to implement those terms. Any bid for amendment of those terms should be directed to the legislature.
I
 [*P101]  The LRA seems to me to foreclose the joint and several liability scheme adopted by the majority. It does so, in my view, by providing that "the maximum amount for which a defendant may be liable to any person seeking recovery is that percentage or proportion of the damages equivalent to the percentage or proportion of fault attributed to that defendant." Utah Code § 78B-5-820(1). And it reinforces that premise with the proviso that "[n]o defendant is liable to any person seeking recovery for any amount in excess of the proportion of fault attributed to that defendant." Id. § 78B-5-818(3).
 [*P102]  The statutory mechanism for effecting these provisions is in the requirement of apportionment of comparative "fault." Under Utah Code section 78B-5-819(1), the factfinder is directed to "determin[e] the total amount of damages sustained and the percentage or proportion of fault attributable to each person seeking recovery, to each defendant, to any person immune from suit, and to any other person identified under Subsection 78B-5-821(4) for whom there is a factual and legal basis to allocate fault."163  That section further provides guidance on how to handle immune parties. Id. § 78B-5-819(2). And it  expressly limits the "cumulative fault" of all parties and relevant nonparties to 100 percent. Id. Subsection 821(4), in turn, prescribes a procedure for identifying unnamed parties to whom fault may be allocated. It states that "[f]ault may not be allocated to a non-party unless a party timely files a description of the factual and legal basis on which fault can be allocated and information identifying the non-party, to the extent known or reasonably available to the party, including name, address, telephone number and employer." Id. § 78B-5-821(4).
 [*P103]  The majority seeks to avoid the effect of these provisions by insisting that strict products liability does not implicate any degree of relative "fault." Supra ¶ 34. It notes that common law products liability was "strict," imposing joint and several liability on any seller in the supply chain of an unreasonably dangerous product, and thus protecting the interests of any who are injured by such product. Supra ¶ 33. And because the LRA incorporates terms of art from the law of products liability, the court concludes that the legislature intended to "preserve "the claims and defenses of products liability as they were understood" at the time the LRA was enacted. Supra ¶ 18; see also supra ¶ 15 (asserting that there are "key aspects of [the strict products liability] doctrine that must continue to exist if we are to honor the legislative intent to retain it").
 [*P104]  The majority seeks to support these conclusions by invoking testimony presented by an assistant attorney general in the legislative proceedings leading to the enactment of the LRA. See supra ¶ 76 (citing Utah Senate Floor Debate, S.B. 64, 46th Leg., Gen. Sess., (Feb. 12, 1986)). It notes that Assistant Attorney General Steve Sorenson stated, during the floor debate, that the LRA would not "change the substantive law of strict liability." Supra ¶ 76. And from that statement the majority infers that "whatever allocation is required under the LRA, it must leave intact the substantive law of strict products liability." Supra ¶ 77.
 [*P105]  I cannot endorse the majority's form of intentionalism.164  This court has frequently stated that the statutory text is the first and best evidence of legislative intent. See, e.g., Anderson v. Bell, 2010 UT 47, ¶ 9, 234 P.3d 1147 (internal quotation marks omitted) ("It is axiomatic that the best evidence of legislative intent is the plain language of the statute itself.")); Berube v. Fashion Ctr., Ltd., 771 P.2d 1033, 1038 (Utah 1989) ("[T]he best indication of legislative intent is the statute's plain language."). Equally often we say that the text is controlling—and forecloses other sources of meaning—where it is clear or  unambiguous. See, e.g., St. Jeor v. Kerr Corp., 2015 UT 49, ¶ 12, 353 P.3d 137 ("[W]here the text of the rule is clear and unambiguous, our inquiry ends, and we need not resort to additional methods of interpretation."); Allred v. Saunders, 2014 UT 43, ¶ 18, 342 P.3d 204 ("Though it is sometimes appropriate to consider legislative history when interpreting statutes, we will not do so when a statute is . . . unambiguous."). That means that legislative history is out of bounds when statutory language is plain. See Hooban v. Unicity Int'l, Inc., 2012 UT 40, ¶ 17, 285 P.3d 766 ("Where the statute's language marks its reach in clear and unambiguous terms, it is our role to enforce a legislative purpose that matches those terms, not to supplant it with a narrower or broader one that we might infer from the legislative history.").165 
 [*P106]  And here, at least in my view, the LRA could hardly be plainer. The statute includes a broad notion of "fault." By statute "[f]ault" encompasses "any actionable breach of legal duty, act, or omission proximately causing or contributing to injury or damages sustained by a person seeking recovery." Utah Code § 78B-5-817(2). And the statutory definition expressly encompasses not just "negligence in all its degrees" but also "products liability," "strict liability," and "breach of express or implied warranty of a product." Id. Under the LRA, then, the factfinder is required to apportion the relative "fault" of various sellers in the supply chain of an unreasonably dangerous product. Id. § 78B-5-819(1). Such apportionment must extend even to a nonparty (for whom there is a factual and legal basis to impose liability). Id. And the total "cumulative fault" for all sellers must not exceed 100 percent. Id. § 78B-5-819(2)(a).166 
 [*P107]  The LRA also forecloses equitable claims for contribution and indemnity. See id. § 78B-5-820(2) ("A defendant is not entitled to contribution from any other person."); id. § 78B-5-823 (preserving only indemnity and contribution "arising from statute, contract, or agreement"). Thus, the LRA envisions a single proceeding in which "fault" is apportioned among all parties and all others as to whom there is a factual and legal basis for apportionment. And the only way to accomplish that feat is to apportion relative fault among various sellers in the supply chain—as expressly required by statute.
 [*P108]  This LRA notion of fault, concededly, is not in line with the common law conception of strict products liability. The majority has the common law doctrine of products liability exactly right. At common law, strict products liability "imposes liability for harm caused by defective products without any regard to the culpability of the defendants." Supra ¶ 23. It "imposes this liability on every 'seller' of the product . . . in order to ensure that a plaintiff will have a meaningful remedy." Supra ¶ 23. And "it permits an 'innocent' non-manufacturer . . . to recover its losses from the manufacturer by way of indemnity." Supra ¶ 23.
 [*P109]   But these are the principles of joint and several liability.167  And they are not compatible with the clear language voted into law by our legislature. See supra ¶ 17 (conceding that "[t]he LRA was expressly designed to eliminate joint and several liability").
 [*P110]  I concede that "there is no room" in the common law "strict liability regime for the consideration of culpability." Supra ¶ 26. But that is not the fault regime adopted by the legislature in the LRA. The LRA made "a choice between fully compensating the plaintiff and proportionally assessing damages to the defendant." Red Flame, Inc., v. Martinez, 2000 UT 22, ¶¶ 18, 20, 996 P.2d 540 (Durham, A.C.J., dissenting) (citation omitted) (refusing to extend the LRA to apportionment of strict liability under the Dramshop Liability Act, but asserting that "the penal and regulatory purposes of the Dramshop Act will be frustrated by permitting application of the comparative fault principles of the Liability Reform Act"). And we are in no position to second-guess that judgment. See id. ¶ 10 (lead opinion of Russon, J., joined by Zimmerman, J.) (concluding that the LRA requires apportionment of strict liability among parties liable under the Dramshop Liability Act); id. ¶ 14 (Howe, C.J., concurring) (concluding that the LRA overrides the Dramshop Act, abolishes joint and several liability, and requires apportionment; conceding that the legislature may not have "intended" that result, but finding himself "constrained by the language" of the LRA).
 [*P111]  It may well be good policy to go a different route. If I were a member of the legislature I might well vote for an amendment to the LRA allowing a plaintiff to choose only one seller in the supply chain—perhaps most often the retailer—who is "known to the plaintiff, amenable to suit, and likely solvent at the time of judgment." Supra ¶ 28. And I might well prefer to leave it to a future indemnity lawsuit to allow the retailer to seek recourse against a manufacturer or other sellers in the supply chain. But I find no room for this regime in our statute.
 [*P112]  The LRA provides no exception for the apportionment of fault in strict liability cases. It specifically lists strict liability and products liability as forms of "fault" that must be apportioned by the factfinder. Utah Code § 78B-5-817; see also S.H. ex rel. Robinson v. Bistryski, 923 P.2d 1376, 1380 (Utah 1996) ("By including 'strict liability' in the definition of fault, the legislature clearly intended comparative fault principles to be applied to strict liability claims . . . .").
 [*P113]  Thus, I find no ambiguity in the LRA on the question whether to apportion fault among various sellers in the supply chain of an unreasonably dangerous product. And for that reason I find no room to insist that the legislature must have intended to preserve the common law regime embraced by the majority.
 [*P114]  The majority's approach runs directly contrary to the statute. Under the majority's scheme cumulative fault will necessarily exceed 100 percent whenever there are multiple defendants who are strictly liable or whenever a lone strictly liable defendant properly brings nonparties within the allocation. In fact, each and every seller in the supply chain will be 100 percent liable. That means that relative fault may be multiples of 100 percent under the majority's framework. That is not the law enacted by the legislature. We should follow the terms of the LRA even if we find it difficult to do so, or troubling as a matter of wise policy. See Graves v. N.E. Servs., Inc., 2015 UT 28, ¶ 70, 345 P.3d 619 ("In the face of a detailed statutory scheme like the Liability Reform Act, our role as policymaker is preempted. We are relegated to the function of agent of the legislature—of interpreting the policy judgment that it reached, and not of imposing our own will through the exercise of our limited judicial power.").
  II
 [*P115]  The above-cited provisions of the LRA provide a straightforward basis for rejecting the so-called passive retailer doctrine. That doctrine confers blanket immunity on a purely passive retailer in a suit in which the manufacturer is named as a party. See Sanns v. Butterfield Ford, 2004 UT App 203, ¶ 15, 94 P.3d 301 (limiting passive retailer immunity to cases in which the manufacturer is named as a party). But such immunity cannot stand under the terms of the LRA and the tenets of strict products liability embraced in our case law (and not foreclosed by this statute).
A
 [*P116]  Under the LRA a passive retailer's comparative fault cannot turn on the presence of the manufacturer as a party to the suit. The factfinder's obligation to allocate comparative fault, as noted, extends not only to parties but also to identified non-parties "for whom there is a factual and legal basis to allocate fault." Utah Code § 78B-5-819(1). A manufacturer will always be one to whom there is a "factual and legal basis to allocate fault" under the law of strict products liability. So the manufacturer's presence as a party cannot be what triggers the premise of the passive retailer doctrine—that 100 percent of the fault will always be allocated to the manufacturer.
 [*P117]  Such an allocation is available whether or not the manufacturer is named as a party. By statute, fault is allocated even to non-parties so long as they are identified under Utah Code section 78B-5-821(4).
 [*P118]  So a key premise of the Sanns immunity doctrine fails as a matter of law. A passive retailer's immunity, if any, cannot depend on the presence of the manufacturer as a defendant in the suit. It must depend on the proposition that a passive retailer could never be deemed at fault to any degree in a case in which the manufacturer could be identified and considered by the factfinder.
B
 [*P119]  The law of strict products liability is likewise incompatible with passive retailer immunity. Retailers—even passive ones—have duties to consumers that run independently of the duties of manufacturers.168  That follows from a core premise of the law of strict products liability—that everyone in the supply chain is in a better position than the consumer to protect against and warn of the risks of unreasonably dangerous products.169  And if even passive retailers have independent duties to consumers injured by unreasonably dangerous products, then it follows that they may retain some element of fault for the injuries incurred by their customers.170 
 [*P120]  This conclusion is reinforced by a line of cases in place at the time of the legislature's adoption of the LRA in 1986. In this line of cases, a number of courts held that the "dividing line" between "active" and "passive" tortious conduct in the law of implied indemnity had been "blurred" or erased by the advent of comparative fault. See Pachowitz v. Milwaukee & Suburban Transp. Corp., 56 Wis. 2d 383, 202 N.W.2d 268, 271-72 (Wis. 1972) (holding that the common law distinction  had been replaced by comparative fault). In other words, these courts held that "the active-passive dichotomy of tort indemnity actions did not survive the statutory adoption of comparative negligence." Ellis v. Union P. R. Co., 231 Kan. 182, 643 P.2d 158, 163 (Kan. 1982). And they repudiated the active-passive distinction in the law of implied indemnity in favor of a nuanced, case-by-case attribution of fault based on principles of comparative negligence.
 [*P121]  This approach prevailed in a wide range of tort cases. Some of these cases involved strict products liability.171  In this field the courts rejected the notion of a hard distinction between active and passive conduct as "artificial"—and as insufficiently nuanced to account for the nuance and complexity of products liability litigation. Casey v. Westinghouse Elevator Co., 651 F. Supp. 258, 262 (S.D. Ill. 1986).
 [*P122]  Yet the repudiation of the active-passive distinction in the law of implied indemnity was not limited to products liability suits. It extended to other circumstances involving a primary, "active" tortfeasor and a secondary tortfeasor with a duty to take action to avoid or mitigate the effects of the primary tortfeasor's acts. One example involves dangerous conditions on land. Under a common law regime of joint and several liability, the party maintaining the dangerous condition was deemed the "active" tortfeasor. See Auto. Underwriters Corp. v. Harrelson, 409 N.W.2d 688, 690-91 (Iowa 1987). A party with a duty to discover and remedy that condition was also liable as a "passive" tortfeasor. Id. But the "passively negligent" party had a right to "recover in full from one actively negligent any judgment or settlement paid by the passively negligent party based on principles of equity." Id. This regime was also deemed foreclosed by the advent of comparative negligence. See Am. Tr. & Sav. Bank v. U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co., 439 N.W.2d 188, 190 (Iowa 1989). Courts held that "the doctrine of indemnity based upon active-passive negligence does not fit within [a] statutory network of comparative fault." Id. And they accordingly abandoned the black-and-white rule apportioning all fault to the active tortfeasor in a suit for implied indemnity, concluding instead that the law of comparative negligence required a nuanced apportionment of relative fault between both tortfeasors.172 
 [*P123]  Our legislature enacted the LRA against the backdrop of the above cases. And I would read the statute to effectively embrace the principle that these cases espouse. In my view the LRA does so by abandoning the premise of a hard distinction between active and passive tortfeasors and replacing it with a mechanism for a nuanced, case-by-case attribution of relative fault for anyone who causes or contributes to an injury by any "act," "omission," or "breach of legal duty." Utah Code § 78B-5-817(2).
 [*P124]  We have effectively so concluded in a series of cases concerning allocation of fault in strict liability cases. In S.H. ex rel. Robinson v. Bistryski, 923 P.2d 1376, 1383 (Utah 1996), for example, we concluded that comparative fault principles should apply tostrict liability under the LRA. And we found  that a "plaintiff's recovery was subject to the application of comparative fault" and could be reduced due to the plaintiff's negligence. Id. at 1380. This was also the conclusion that we reached in Mulherin v. Ingersoll-Rand Co., 628 P.2d 1301, 1303 (Utah 1981), as to products liability cases.173 
 [*P125]  Our recent decision in Graves v. North Eastern Services, Inc., 2015 UT 28, 345 P.3d 619, points in the same direction. In Graves we held that the LRA requirement of comparative allocation of fault extended to intentionally tortious acts. In so doing, we acknowledged the inherent difficulty of the factfinder's task of allocating relative fault to both a primary intentional tortfeasor and to a passively negligent one (an employer who failed to prevent the intentional tort). Specifically, we conceded that intentionally tortious conduct is "categorically different"—and inherently more blameworthy—than a negligent failure to prevent it. Id. ¶ 71 (citation omitted). Yet we also explained that a "factfinder could easily apportion" responsibility to passive acts of negligence representing a "clear chance of preventing" an intentional tort. Id. And we interpreted the LRA to leave to the factfinder the relative apportionment of fault between an active, intentional tortfeasor and a person who passively failed to prevent such misconduct despite the sensitive, nuanced nature of that task. Id.
 [*P126]  This framework is incompatible with the theory that comparative fault applies only between plaintiffs and defendants in strict liability cases. A "passive" retailer is in a position comparable to that of the employer in Graves. Its role is "categorically different" from that of the antecedent actor whose act might be understood as more active. Yet our law still holds the passive actor liable for acts, omissions, or breaches of legal duty resulting in harm. And the LRA leaves it to the factfinder to sort out the relative fault to be allocated to each party.
 [*P127]  In cases both predating and postdating the LRA, retailers have at least sometimes been left with a portion of liability for harms caused by the dangerous products they sold—even in cases in which the manufacturer is also on the hook.174  A straightforward  example involves a breach by a retailer of the duty to warn: A factfinder could easily conclude that a retailer is in as good or better a position to warn a consumer of a product's risks than the manufacturer.175  In that event the passive retailer could be on the hook for at least some proportion of fault in a products liability action.176 
 [*P128]  The principle that a passive retailer may be held liable for breach of an express warranty is even more firmly established. Implied indemnity, in other words, was never available to a retailer who breached an express warranty.177  And claims for breach of express warranty have been preserved even in states that have adopted the doctrine of passive retailer immunity.178 
 [*P129]  As in Graves, it may perhaps be said that the manufacturer's acts or omissions are "categorically different"—and even inherently more blameworthy—than those of the passive retailer. 2015 UT 28, ¶ 71, 345 P.3d 619. But under our law a "factfinder could easily apportion" responsibility to even the passive  acts of a retailer.179  Id. And the LRA accordingly leaves the relative apportionment of fault between the two tortfeasors to the factfinder.
III
 [*P130]  To the above extent I agree with the majority's ultimate conclusion that the LRA abrogates passive retailer immunity. But that is because I think it is at least possible that a factfinder, in an appropriate case, could attribute fault to a passive retailer. It is not, as the majority asserts, because the LRA has preserved the joint and several liability scheme often associated with strict liability. See supra ¶ 47. And I would interpret the LRA to leave the question of fault to the factfinder—even in strict liability cases—in a manner that is inconsistent with the notion of blanket immunity for a passive retailer. For these and other reasons, I disagree with the majority's position that a passive retailer may initiate a separate suit against the manufacturer under the law of implied indemnity.
 [*P131]  As noted, I believe the foundation of the LRA is the requirement of a single suit in which every person who could be charged with fault is considered in a unitary proceeding aimed at global attribution of comparative fault. Because that unitary determination of comparative fault encompasses not just parties to the suit but any individual who can be identified and for whom there is a "factual and legal basis to allocate fault," Utah Code § 78B-5-819(1), the LRA forecloses the need for satellite suits aimed at equitable reallocation of such fault.180 
 [*P132]  This is not unique to the LRA. It is the implicit effect of a legal regime that calls for a comparative allocation of fault in a single legal proceeding. "In a state following comparative contribution, or contribution according to the comparative fault of the parties, contribution may tend to merge with indemnity," and "[t]he eventual outcome is likely to be a single remedy based on comparative fault." Restatement (Second) of Torts § 886A cmt. l (Am. Law Inst. 1979); see also W. Page Keeton et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 51, at 343 (5th ed. 1984) (noting that any "rule that gives one tortious actor a right of indemnity from another tortious actor[] may be held inapplicable after the principle of comparative fault has been adopted").181 
 [*P133]  The LRA includes two provisions, moreover, that refer expressly to the law of contribution and indemnity. See Utah Code § 78B-5-820(2) ("A defendant is not entitled to contribution from any other person."); id. § 78B-5-823 ("Nothing in Sections 78B-5-817 through 78B-5-822 affects or impairs any right to indemnity or contribution arising from statute, contract, or agreement."). I read these provisions as reinforcing the key premise of the Act—that comparative fault is to be allocated in a single, unitary proceeding under the LRA, and not in separate suits for contribution or indemnity.182 
 [*P134]   The point of the first-cited provision is straightforward. Independent actions sounding in the law of "contribution" are expressly foreclosed. Utah Code § 78B-5-820(2). That makes good sense in light of the above. The rights of contribution and indemnity were aimed at allowing a single tortfeasor subject to joint and several liability for a joint tort to seek proportionate compensation from a fellow tortfeasor.183  And the LRA obviates the need for any such subsequent suit by requiring the comparative proportion of liability for each joint tortfeasor to be allocated in a single suit. Section 78B-5-820(2) thus makes explicit what is already implicit elsewhere in the LRA. Actions for any contribution are foreclosed because they are unnecessary under a regime in which comparative fault is allocated globally in a unitary statutory proceeding.
 [*P135]  The second-cited provision, Utah Code section 78B-5-823, is a bit less clear. It provides that "any right to indemnity or contribution arising from statute, contract, or agreement" is not foreclosed by the LRA. Utah Code § 78B-5-823 (emphasis added). The italicized terms are significant. They provide the grounds for reconciling section 823 with section 820(2): Although a common law right of contribution or indemnity is foreclosed by statute, a right of indemnity or contribution "arising from statute, contract, or agreement" is not. Id.
 [*P136]  The distinction is premised on a key difference between the common law action for contribution on one hand and statutory or contract-based principles of indemnity or contribution on the other. The former, as noted above, is premised on a principle of comparative fault. A single tortfeasor held jointly and severally liable for 100 percent of a plaintiff's damages could seek proportionate contribution from a second joint tortfeasor in an action for common law contribution. And the premise of such an action was a concern for the inequity or arbitrariness of a single tortfeasor being fully liable for harm that was only partially caused by his action.184  This sort of action, as explained above, is foreclosed by the LRA.
 [*P137]  But statutory and contract-based actions are different. They are generally premised on something other than an equitable assessment of the parties' proportionate or comparative fault.185  A manufacturer, for example, could enter into a contract with a retailer in which the latter agrees to accept any responsibility assigned in a tort suit to the manufacturer. And if the manufacturer is deemed 90 percent at fault in a products liability suit advanced by a consumer, the LRA would not foreclose a subsequent suit for contractual indemnity or contribution by the manufacturer against the retailer.186  Such a suit, after all, would be purely contract-based. And because it would not be premised simply on reallocating comparative fault between  the manufacturer and the retailer—but instead on vindicating the manufacturer's contractual rights—the suit would be consistent with the LRA's requirement of a single, unitary proceeding for allocating comparative fault.
 [*P138]  I would interpret the LRA to embrace this exception to the general prohibition on independent suits for common law contribution or implied indemnity. The general rule is that separate suits are barred to the extent they are premised on common law principles of equitable allocation of comparative fault. But an exception applies to actions under a statute or contract that are not based on a simple reallocation of fault.
IV
 [*P139]  For the above reasons I would reverse the decision granting R.C. Willey's motion to dismiss and vacate the denial of the fee request submitted by the Bylsmas. In so doing I would reject the passive retailer doctrine and overrule the court of appeals' decision in Sanns v. Butterfield Ford, 2004 UT App 203, 94 P.3d 301. But I would do so based on the scheme established by the LRA and not on preempted principles of the common law of strict products liability. And I accordingly would hold that the LRA eliminates common law indemnity and contribution actions.

 

