 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P51]  I concur in the court's decision upholding the enforceability of the liquidated damages clause at issue in this case, but write separately because I disagree with its basis for doing so. The court today makes a useful clarification of the legal standard that applies in evaluating the enforceability of liquidated damages provisions. But in my view it errs in going further—in repudiating the standard for assessing liquidated damages clauses set forth in the Restatement (First) of Contracts and repeatedly endorsed by this court.1  I would affirm that standard (after clarifying it in the way the court does) instead of repudiating it in favor of an ill-defined inquiry into unconscionability.
 [*P52]  On an important threshold point, I agree with the court's conclusion that our liquidated damages cases stand in need of clarification. Supra ¶ 20. As the court has ably explained, our liquidated damages precedents have employed a range of different standards. Prior to our adoption of the Restatement test in 1993, our cases seemed to be in conflict and no standard was uniformly employed. Supra ¶¶ 20-33. We resolved much of the conflict in adopting the Restatement test, however. The problem that remained in our prior case law is one the court corrects today—the tendency to "evaluate the enforceability of liquidated damages clauses with the benefit of hindsight, rather than as of the time of contract formation." Supra ¶ 36. As the court notes, such post-hoc review is problematic for various reasons, supra ¶ 36, not the least of which is its potential to inject arbitrariness and unpredictability into a field in which contracting parties need a sound basis for reliance.
 [*P53]  I am accordingly in full agreement with a threshold course-correction charted by the majority—its repudiation of the hind sight based approach followed in some of our cases and clarification that the reasonableness evaluation must be made from the standpoint of the parties at the time they entered into the contract. But I see no reason to take the additional step of abandoning the timeworn Restatement test in its entirety. That test, informed by a wealth of precedent in this state and the many others that have embraced it, provides needed predictability for contracting parties seeking to anticipate the likely enforceability of the terms of their agreement. We should reaffirm that standard (after clarifying it), as there is no good reason to abandon it.
 [*P54]  The imprecisions in our liquidated damages cases are hardly grounds for discarding the Restatement test. The problem is not the Restatement test; it is the notion of post-hoc evaluation of reasonableness. But that approach pre-dates this court's express adoption of the Restatement test in  1993,2  and the cases decided since then are uniformly consistent. Though few in number, each has relied on the Restatement test. And none has fallen into the error of hindsight-based evaluation of reasonableness.3  The problem seems comfortably behind us.
 [*P55]  Even before we embraced the Restatement standard in 1993, many of our cases still endorsed a "reasonable forecast" or similar test. Although those cases proceeded to engage in improper post-hoc weighing, some nonetheless appeared to start with the right premise—that the question is whether liquidated damages are "disproportionate to any possible loss that might have been contemplated."4  These cases, therefore, do not demonstrate our court's preference for a different standard so much as they show a failure to apply accepted principles correctly.5  The proper reaction, then, is not to throw out the cases in their entirety, but to correct the error in application. The court has now done that, and we need not go further.
 [*P56]  The supposed internal inconsistency in the Restatement standard, see supra ¶ 37, is also no reason to abandon it. The criticism put forward by the court on this score rests on a misunderstanding of the law. Properly understood, there is no incompatibility between the two prongs of the Restatement inquiry.
 [*P57]  The reasonable forecast inquiry is the core standard under the Restatement; the difficulty of estimation element is subsidiary and explanatory. Nothing about that latter element in any way renders the core legal inquiry "'circular.'" Supra ¶ 37 (quoting Arrowhead Sch. Dist. No. 75, Park Cnty. v. Klyap, 2003 MT 294, 318 Mont. 103, 79 P.3d 250, 258 (Mont. 2003)). Courts and commentators have long resolved any apparent difficulty in comprehending "how courts can evaluate the reasonableness of a forecast made when actual damages are nearly impossible to estimate at the time of contract formation," supra ¶ 37: When damages are difficult to estimate at the time of contract formation, a liquidated sum is more likely to be deemed reasonable (and vice versa).6  That's the whole point of the Restatement's two-part inquiry; it's a sliding scale, with the degree of deference to the damages liquidated by contract depending on the degree of difficulty of estimating damages in advance. Thus, the Restatement test presents not a "'Hobson's choice,'" supra ¶ 37, but a helpful clarification of the standard that has long governed the enforceability of liquidated damages clauses in Utah and elsewhere.
 [*P58]   I would thus retain that standard and apply it in this case, as neither the parties nor the court have identified any persuasive reason to abandon it. And even if I were of a mind to jettison this test, I would not replace it with the undefined standard of "unconscionability" adopted by the court today. Supra ¶ 39. I am, of course, on board with the general principle of freedom of contract. It's hard to argue with the "right of persons to contract freely and to make real and genuine mistakes when the dealings are at arms' length," much less with the notion that it is not the prerogative of the courts "'to step in and renegotiate the contract of the parties,'" supra ¶ 39 (quoting Peck v. Judd, 7 Utah 2d 420, 326 P.2d 712, 717 (Utah 1958)). But those general principles are subject to limited exceptions, which are necessary (as the majority itself acknowledges) to foreclose the availability of "'punitive damages'" for breach of contract, supra ¶ 40, which would have the troubling effect of deterring efficient breach.7  So the question before us is not whether to recognize a general rule favoring the freedom of contract; it is how to define the exception to the general rule in the liquidated damages context.
 [*P59]  The majority replaces the settled standard adopted in our cases with an undefined "unconscionability" inquiry into whether "the facts clearly demonstrate that it would be unconscionable to decree enforcement of the terms of the contract." Supra ¶ 39. Without some elaboration by the court, that standard strikes me as an invitation for arbitrariness in future cases.
 [*P60]  The substantive unconscionability inquiry invites an evaluation of the reasonableness of the substance of the bargain entered into by the parties.8  If the reasonableness assessment is to be conducted from the standpoint of the parties at the time of formation—as the majority opinion demands, supra ¶ 46—then perhaps the analysis will look much like the Restatement "reasonable forecast" inquiry. If that is what the majority has in mind, then today's decision rejecting that standard is at best perplexing. And if the majority has something else in mind (as we must suppose from the court's express repudiation of the Restatement), then the matter is even worse.
 [*P61]  The majority never explains how the substantive unconscionability or fairness of a liquidated damages clause is to be evaluated going forward. It offers only its bottom-line conclusion that "the contractual amount of liquidated damages" is not "unreasonable as compensation for a breach of the contractual duty to continuously operate the building." Supra ¶ 46. That fuzzy fairness analysis is an invitation for arbitrariness in judicial decisionmaking.9  Contracting parties deserve more from the courts. They deserve a workable standard they can rely on and contract around.10  I see the Restatement standard as  providing that predictability and workability. In rejecting it, the court revives the muddle it so helpfully resolved in the first part of its opinion. I therefore disagree with the adoption of an undefined unconscionability standard in a field where predictability and reliance are so crucial.
 [*P62]  Under the Restatement standard that I would apply, the judgment entered by the majority would still obtain. As the party seeking to challenge the enforceability of the liquidated damages clause in this case, Comcast bore the burden of demonstrating that the damages liquidated by the parties in this case were a reasonable forecast of the damages they anticipated at the time of the execution of the contract.11  And Comcast utterly failed to carry its burden and thus should lose on that basis. Specifically, because Comcast failed to present any evidence of the nature of the damages anticipated by the parties or of the relationship the liquidated damages bore to those damages, its challenge to the liquidated damages clause in this case fails as a matter of law. I would affirm on that basis instead of altering our standard in a way that seems sure to undermine predictability in contracts in Utah and to inject arbitrariness into the judicial evaluation of liquidated damages clauses.

 

