). Courts should not go looking for opportunities to "become a policymaker instead of an interpreter." Id. "We should presume that the legislature intended to preserve the respective legislative and judicial roles, with the legislature making policy and the courts construing and applying that policy to cases that come before them." Id. "If one of two interpretations of a statute conflates those roles, it should accordingly be rejected as contrary to legislative intent." Id.40 
 [*P177]  This should be doubly true in a case, like this one, where the statute we interpret is a federal law addressing a domain long governed exclusively by state law. I see no room for the conclusion that Congress meant for this court to put our policymaker hats on and decide on the best standard for the acknowledgement or establishment of paternity. Surely it's more likely that its use of settled terms of state law was a signal that Congress was asking us to apply established state law.
B. Response to Majority
 [*P178]  The majority finds it "obvious that the plain language" of ICWA does not dictate the application of state law standards of paternity. Supra P 50. It bases that conclusion on its sense of Congress's "purpose" in enacting ICWA, and on analysis in Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield, 490 U.S. 30, 109 S. Ct. 1597, 104 L. Ed. 2d 29 (1989), that it views as supportive of its holding. And it claims that my approach violates the traditional meaning of the phrase "term of art." I find none of these points persuasive.
 [*P179]  First, the purported "purpose" of ICWA cannot override the terms of the statute. ICWA, as noted, balances multiple purposes. And we overstep our bounds if we fail to credit the compromised balance of those purposes reflected in the statutory text. Myers v. Myers, 2011 UT 65, P 27, 266 P.3d 806; Olsen v. Eagle Mountain City, 2011 UT 10, P 23 n.6, 248 P.3d 465.
 [*P180]  As noted above, ICWA, at a minimum, is also aimed at preserving the sovereignty of the state courts over adoption and paternity—and in protecting the children whose interests are so keenly implicated in adoption proceedings. Thus, it is entirely correct to say that ICWA was aimed at protecting the integrity of Indian families. But because the statutory purpose was not to advance that purpose at all costs, our inquiry cannot end at that high level of generality. We must consider how Congress struck the balance at the specific level of the terms of the statute.41 
 [*P181]   The Holyfield opinion is not to the contrary. Nor does it support the majority's holding in this case. In Holyfield, the court interpreted a provision in ICWA granting tribal courts the exclusive jurisdiction over custody proceedings involving an Indian child "who resides or is domiciled within" a tribe's reservation. 490 U.S. at 36 (quoting 25 U.S.C. § 1911(a)). And, as the majority here indicates, the Holyfield court interpreted the term "domicile" to prescribe a federal standard. Id. at 43-47. In so concluding, moreover, the Holyfield court stated a "general assumption that 'in the absence of a plain indication to the contrary, . . . Congress when it enacts a statute is not making the application of the federal act dependent on state law.'" Id. at 43 (alteration in original) (quoting Jerome v. United States, 318 U.S. 101, 104, 63 S. Ct. 483, 87 L. Ed. 640 (1943)).
 [*P182]  Yet Holyfield announces no hard and fast rule. Indeed it acknowledges that "Congress sometimes intends that a statutory term be given content by the application of state law." Id. And the grounds for the court's holding in Holyfield simply do not apply here. Holyfield is distinguishable.
 [*P183]  Holyfield does not conclude that ICWA's purpose of protecting Indian families mandates a uniform federal standard for all terms in the statute. It acknowledges the contrary. Id. And it begins its analysis with "'the assumption that the legislative purpose is expressed by the ordinary meaning of the words used.'" Id. at 47 (quoting Richards v. United States, 369 U.S. 1, 9, 82 S. Ct. 585, 7 L. Ed. 2d 492 (1962)). Thus, the core holding in Holyfield is different from the one described by the majority in this case. Holyfield is based on the statutory text. And it holds that "domicile" is a statement of a uniform standard not because ICWA's broad purpose demands uniformity in all cases, but because "'[d]omicile' is . . . a concept widely used in both federal and state courts for jurisdiction and conflict-of-laws purposes, and its meaning is generally uncontroverted." Id. at 48 (emphasis added). And the uncontroverted meaning includes the standards for demonstrating domicile that are almost universally accepted among federal and state jurisdictions. See id.
 [*P184]  Thus, the Holyfield opinion is quite different from the majority opinion in this case. The Holyfield court did not construct its own preferred standard of domicile—a standard informed only by a vague sense that Congress must have meant to provide "less exacting" requirements for Indian parents than the laws of many states. Supra P 71. The Holyfield analysis is textual. It is rooted in the "generally accepted meaning of the term 'domicile.'" Holyfield, 490 U.S. at 47.
 [*P185]  As noted above, there is no such thing as a "generally accepted meaning" of acknowledging or establishing paternity in the sense discussed in Holyfield. As a product of our federalism, the fifty states have adopted a range of procedures and standards for the acknowledgement or establishment of paternity.42  This could not have been a surprise for the Congress that enacted ICWA.
 [*P186]  The majority takes issue with this analysis. It claims that I am relying on "an erroneous view of the definition of a term of art." Supra P 55. Thus, the majority insists that a term of art must have a single "core meaning." Supra P 56. And the majority rejects my approach on the ground that the state-by-state definitions of acknowledge and establish "do not share a common core." Supra P 56. From that premise, the majority proceeds to the conclusion that the words acknowledgement and establishment of paternity are ordinary (not legal) terms as used in ICWA. Supra P 58. And the court cites a few cases that purportedly support this conclusion.  Supra P 58.43 
 [*P187]  None of this adds up in my view. The court's starting premise is overbroad; it misses the obvious implications of our American federalism. The law of paternity is like many other pockets of state law, with substantial variation from state to state. State law varies widely on a wide range of questions, such as negligence, strict liability, breach of contract, divorce, child custody, and intestate succession. But a federal statute invoking legal terminology from one of these fields would not properly be understood as using the words of the law in an ordinary (non-legal) sense just because there are legal variations from state to state.44 
 [*P188]  The terms in question here—acknowledgement and establishment of paternity — moreover, are legal terms with a common "core meaning." At the heart of every state's standards for acknowledgement of paternity is the question whether the purported parents have shown that they accept responsibility for the child. Acknowledge, Black's Law Dictionary (9th ed. 2009) (defining "acknowledge" as "[t]o show that one accepts responsibility for <acknowledge paternity of the child>"). Establishment of paternity also has a core meaning. This is the legal notion that the purported parents "settle, make, or fix firmly" that they are the true parents of the child. Establish, Black's Law Dictionary (9th ed. 2009).45  There are variations across the fifty states as to the procedure or standards for acknowledging or establishing paternity. But those variations stem from each state's policy preferences and prerogatives. They do not undefine these legal terms of art.
 [*P189]  If a statute speaks the language of the law, then we interpret that term in accordance with established legal conventions. This is a settled tenet of the law of interpretation.46  And that tenet does not change just because we find a lack of a single, clear meaning of the legal term in question.47 
 [*P190]   Where a legal term is employed, we can understand the term only by reference to the norms and conventions of that language. The language of the law is like a distinct dialect.48  And we will misunderstand the dialect if we ignore its norms and conventions.
 [*P191]  Granted, it is possible to speak of acknowledging or establishing paternity without reference to the law. But a statutory reference to these established legal terms should be viewed against the backdrop of the law. And we will misunderstand or misuse the terminology if we ignore its legal context.49  The majority commits this fatal error in its approach.
 [*P192]  In my view it is beside the point that "Utah law requires the birth mother's signature in addition to the unmarried biological father's signature" as a condition of an acknowledgement "through a declaration of paternity." Supra P 67. Surely that does not mean that "the unmarried biological father's option to acknowledge paternity is . . . read out of ICWA."50  Supra P 67. It simply means that E.T. failed to secure his paternity through an acknowledgement under Utah law. ICWA's bare reference to acknowledgement or establishment of paternity cannot properly be read as a guarantee that a given putative father will qualify under either. It is simply an indication that either means of securing rights of paternity in a given state's law will suffice as a matter of federal Indian law. And certainly E.T. could have secured his paternity rights under Utah law; he simply failed to do so in any of the means required by our law.
 [*P193]  There is likewise nothing "anomalous" about the notion that "an unmarried biological Indian father's status as a parent under ICWA" depends on his compliance with the laws of the state where the child is born. Supra P 69. That is not some unforeseen oddity of my reading of ICWA; it is an inherent feature of our longstanding system of federalism that was well-known to Congress—a system in which parental rights are a creature of state law, and thus may be established under the various laws of the fifty states.
 [*P194]  The alternative, moreover, is a make-it-up-as-we-go standard—a standard without any real content, except the notion that a biological father must meet an undefined "reasonability standard" that is "less exacting" than the requirements of Utah law. Supra P 71. That seems close to an admission that the court has no standard. And the lack of a standard assures that the majority cannot ultimately live up to its premises.
 [*P195]  Instead the majority offers only a bare holding—that E.T.'s "actions satisfied the requirements for acknowledging paternity under ICWA using a reasonability standard." Supra P 74. And the court simply lists the facts it deems sufficient under the circumstances of this case. That is a further admission that we are not stating a legal standard but only a disposition of this case.
 [*P196]  Perhaps that's understandable. The logic of the court's opinion, after all, is one that can lead only to the conclusion that any  bare "acknowledgement" of paternity, however minimal, must suffice as a matter of federal Indian law. To support its holding, the majority points to hurdles set by Utah law that E.T. has not satisfied. See supra P 67. And it concludes that Utah law is too "exacting." Supra P 71. Thus, it is unacceptable, in the court's view, to allow "state law to determine who is a parent under ICWA" because that "would, in some cases, provide a lower level of protection of parental rights than ICWA intends." Supra P 67. With this in mind, the court sets forth a vague reasonability standard that purports to be more protective "of parental rights pertaining to Indian children." Supra P 71.
 [*P197]  But why stop there? The logic of the court's opinion will lead inevitably to the most minimally "exacting" acknowledgement of paternity imaginable. Anything less, after all, could sustain the same conclusion reached in this case—that ICWA's purpose is to protect the rights of Indian tribal members, and that allowing state law (or any law except a minimalist acknowledgement) "to determine who is a parent under ICWA would . . . provide a lower level of protection of parental rights than ICWA intends."51  Supra P 67.
 [*P198]  The majority apparently perceives the problem with that approach. If any bare acknowledgement by a putative father will do, then the statutory definition will be eviscerated: All unwed putative fathers will become entitled to notice and a right to intervene because any father can plausibly say he made a bare acknowledgement of paternity at some point. And that cannot be. See VCS, Inc. v. Utah Cmty. Bank, 2012 UT 89, P 18, 293 P.3d 290 (noting that an interpretation that would "swallow" statutory language "runs afoul of the settled canon of preserving independent meaning for all statutory provisions").
 [*P199]  Presumably that is why the court stops short of stating a meaningful standard. Perhaps it acknowledges that we cannot defensibly pick a paternity standard out of the air. But unless we are willing to set the bar at the lowest imaginable level, the logic of the court's opinion will always call for us to set it lower; otherwise we will have a standard that is too "exacting" to satisfy the purpose of ICWA. So the court, naturally, is left to state no meaningful standard at all.
 [*P200]  And that is also untenable—and completely at odds with the core premise of the court's opinion. The majority's premise is that Congress could not have intended a state-law-based notion of acknowledgement or establishment of paternity because it intended a nationwide uniform standard. See supra P 71. Yet the court's holding assures the exact opposite. This court today says that Utah law has set the paternity bar too high. But absent any meaningful legal standard, our opinion today assures a complete lack of uniformity. If today's opinion takes hold in other states, it will guarantee chaos and unpredictability—not uniformity. It will invite each court faced with the paternity question to offer its own subjective assessment of what is a "reasonable" acknowledgment of paternity and whether the state or tribal paternity laws in question are too "exacting." Supra P 71.
 [*P201]  The majority's approach may also produce devastating unintended consequences. By recognizing an unwed father's right to notice and intervention upon a vague, informal "acknowledgement" of paternity, and ignoring the backward-looking requirement of paternity that "has . . . been acknowledged," the court opens the door to the possibility that a putative Indian father will come forward months or even years later and assert a right to disrupt even a finalized adoption. If and when this eventuality arises, perhaps the courts will find a "reasonability" time bar or estoppel basis to avoid this disruption. But I see no basis for it on the face of ICWA. So as the law stands there is no assurance that an adoption of an Indian child  will ever be truly final. The court's approach leaves open the possibility of disruption of any adoption of an Indian child whose biological father might one day claim to have "acknowledged" his paternity.
 [*P202]  This cannot be what Congress had in mind when it limited the rights of notice and intervention to unwed fathers who have had their paternity acknowledged or established. Surely Congress meant for courts to apply a fixed legal standard. And because ICWA uses settled terms of art from family law, I would interpret it to incorporate state (and tribal) law on this question. I would accordingly affirm the district court's denial of E.T.'s motion to dismiss.
III. CONCLUSION
 [*P203]  For reasons stated in Part I of this opinion a majority of the court finds no defect in subject-matter jurisdiction. A different majority nonetheless reverses the denial of the motion to intervene. I dissent from that decision for reasons set forth in Part II of my opinion. I would also affirm the district court's denial of E.T.'s motion to dismiss and remand for finalization of the adoption.

 

