
 [*P33]  Shanelle Gailey has not been deprived of an appeal. She filed one, and we are considering it in our opinions in this case. Thus, the effect of the Plea Withdrawal Statute, Utah Code section 77-13-6, is not to "cut[] off a defendant's right to a direct appeal." Supra ¶ 2. It is only to limit the issues that may be raised therein, by a rule of preservation or waiver.
 [*P34]  The Plea Withdrawal Statute does not foreclose an appeal. It simply says that a defendant may not seek to "withdraw a plea of guilty" at any time after a "sentence is announced." Utah Code § 77-13-6(2)(b). This is a rule of preservation, or in other words, waiver. It says only that a guilty plea may not be challenged further—either in the district court or on appeal—if it is not withdrawn prior to sentencing. Thus, Gailey has not lost her right to appeal; she simply waived the right to raise a specific issue (the validity of her guilty plea) by not preserving the argument at the time required by the governing law.
 [*P35]  Rules of this sort are commonplace. They are embedded in our caselaw under the law of preservation1  and reflected in our rules of procedure.2  Such rules require parties to raise issues or arguments at specified times and by certain means. And they treat a failure to comply as a waiver of the right to raise such issues later in the litigation.
 [*P36]  These sorts of rules—in the law of preservation and in our rules of procedure—have never been thought to impinge on the constitutional right to an appeal. Yet the majority proceeds on the premise that they do. It characterizes the Plea Withdrawal Statute as a law that "cuts off" Ms. Gailey's "right to a direct appeal once sentencing is announced," and proceeds to the question whether "the PCRA remedy is . . . an adequate substitute for a direct appeal." Supra ¶¶ 2-3.
 [*P37]  The court stops short of resolving that issue on its merits. Because the heart of the issue presented concerns the question whether the right to an appeal encompasses a right to paid counsel, and because Ms. Gailey has not yet been deprived of paid counsel, the majority concludes that her claim to a right to "state-paid counsel" is "not ripe." Supra ¶ 23. And it dismisses the appeal without opining3  on the existence of such a right.
 [*P38]  Yet the court proceeds on the implicit premise that the state constitutional right to appeal encompasses a right to paid counsel. It does so between the lines of its discussion in paragraphs 28 and 29. There the court acknowledges that there is neither a right to "state-paid counsel" nor a "right to effective assistance of counsel" "in postconviction proceedings." Supra ¶ 28. But it proceeds to note that "although state paid-counsel is not  guaranteed, the PCRA provides that 'the court may, upon the request of an indigent petitioner, appoint counsel on a pro bono basis to represent the petitioner." Id. (citation omitted). And it deems Gailey's constitutional argument unripe on that basis. It says that "[w]e cannot declare the PCRA remedy to be a constitutional violation of the right to assistance of counsel on appeal based on a hypothetical future denial of counsel." Supra ¶ 29 (emphasis added).
 [*P39]  The implication is that Gailey's state constitutional right to an appeal may be implicated if she is not ultimately given counsel in a future PCRA proceeding. That seems problematic.
 [*P40]  I understand the impulse in favor of constitutional avoidance. Perhaps the court perceives its decision as a matter of restraint. But it strikes me as the opposite. By kicking the can down the road, the court implies that the state constitution may require appointment of counsel in a PCRA proceeding challenging the voluntariness of a guilty plea.
 [*P41]  That is a significant proposition. I would not lightly assume that the right to paid counsel is implied by the state constitutional "right to appeal," as those words were originally understood.4  And I see no reason for us to resolve that matter here, even implicitly.
 [*P42]  Instead, I would affirm on the threshold basis identified above. Before reaching the question whether the PCRA is an adequate substitute for an appeal, I would first ask whether any such right was meaningfully impinged by the Plea Withdrawal Statute. I would hold that it was not. I would hold that the right to appeal is not implicated by rules dictating the proper means and timing of preserving an issue in the district court. And I would deem the failure to follow such rules a waiver or forfeiture of the right to raise the issue in subsequent proceedings.
 [*P43]  Such rules may be subject to constitutional challenge. But the basis for challenging them would not be that they eliminate the right of appeal. Rules of preservation and waiver or forfeiture always foreclose the right to raise an issue on appeal. They cannot be unconstitutional on that basis alone, unless we are prepared to say that such rules are per se unconstitutional.
 [*P44]  I see no basis for that kind of blanket conclusion. Certainly Gailey has not identified one.
 [*P45]  At oral argument the question arose as to the legislature's power to dictate rules governing the timing of filings in district court or the law of preservation in the Plea Withdrawal Statute. That may be a fair question for consideration in a future case. See Utah Const. art. VIII, § 4 (providing that this court has the power to "adopt rules of procedure and evidence to be used in courts of the state" and to "manage the appellate process" "by rule," while recognizing the legislature's power to "amend" such rules "upon a vote of two-thirds of all members of both houses"). But no one has challenged the Plea Withdrawal Statute under article 8, section 4. And in the absence of such a challenge, the filing requirement prescribed in this statute is no different than any of a range of other rules of preservation or waiver set forth elsewhere in our law.
 [*P46]  Such rules do not implicate the state constitutional right to an appeal. I would affirm on that basis.

 

