 in part and dissenting in part:
 [*P63]  In the past several decades, this court's standing jurisprudence has strayed  further and further from its traditional mooring in the judicial power clause of the Utah Constitution. Thus, although we have long recognized a "traditional" conception of standing requiring individualized injuries sustaining private rights of action, our more recent decisions have exhibited increasing willingness to overlook that requirement under a "public interest" exception. That exception, as reconceived by the court today, stretches the principle of standing beyond recognition.
 [*P64]  I respectfully dissent from the majority's invocation—and extension—of this "public interest" exception to the traditional requirement of standing. Its methodology is incompatible with the judicial power clause in Article VIII of the Utah Constitution. That clause limits our authority to the resolution of cases that fall within the traditional conception of the judicial power. In overriding these constraints, the majority robs the constitutional limits on our power of meaningful content. It does so to uphold standing for the Article VI claimants in this case on public interest grounds, thereby subjecting the standing inquiry to the arbitrary discretion of the court, under a standardless "test" that is little more than a post-hoc justification for a preferred result. Under this test, the standing question is left to a subjective, case-by-case assessment of a majority of the court as to whether the claims seem sufficiently "important" to merit review.
 [*P65]  Instead of expanding the public interest exception, I would repudiate our prior dicta on this point and reject the exception altogether. And I would resolve the case under a traditional formulation of standing—one requiring an assertion of injury sustaining a private action. That formulation, in my view, requires dismissal of all of the claims at issue in this case, including the Article VI claims the majority reaches on public interest grounds.
I. STANDING AS A CONSTITUTIONAL COMPONENT OF THE JUDICIAL POWER
 [*P66]  Standing is not a judge-made principle of judicial restraint subject to common-law evolution over time. It is an essential element of the constitutional provisions defining and limiting the judicial power. Such an element requires careful definition, rooted in an interpretation of the binding text of our constitution. We assail the very principle of constitutionalism when we ignore that interpretive role and opt instead to invoke and refine standardless "exceptions" justifying (but failing to explain) our case-by-case preferences to exercise jurisdiction in some cases but not in others.
 [*P67]  We recently underscored these central points in the parallel context of our mootness doctrine. In Utah Transit Authority v. Local 382 of the Amalgamated Transit Union, 2012 UT 75, 289 P.3d 582, we repudiated a freestanding,1  discretionary "public interest" exception to the doctrine of mootness, explaining that mootness is an essential "element of the principles defining the scope of the 'judicial power' vested in the courts by the Utah Constitution," not a "simple matter of judicial convenience or ascetic act of discretion." Id. ¶ 18. After identifying the historical basis for foreclosing the use of judicial power to issue advisory opinions, our opinion in Utah Transit Authority chided the parties for urging our invocation of standardless "discretion" to exercise judicial power withheld by traditional constitutional bounds, noting:
The notion of such discretion is repugnant to the very idea of a written constitution. That document protects us by setting forth fundamental limitations on government authority that cannot be crossed or  disregarded as a matter of convenience or discretion. We accept that principle as established orthodoxy on matters of individual rights such as that of free speech or double jeopardy. But it is no less viable on matters defining the structural scope of the powers of the branches of government.
Id. ¶ 25 (citation omitted).
 [*P68]  Our Utah Transit Authority opinion also clarified the appropriate methodology for interpreting the constitutional limits on our judicial power. While recognizing that the text of Article VIII's articulation of "[t]he judicial power of the state" does not "reveal the precise scope" of our power, we emphasized "one fundamental point": "The scope of our authority is not a matter for the courts to define at our preference or whim; we are constitutionally limited to wield only 'judicial power' and may not act extra-judicially (regardless of how interesting or important the matter presented for our consideration)." Id. ¶ 20 (alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Mellor v. Wasatch Crest Mut. Ins., 2012 UT 24, ¶ 14, 282 P.3d 981 ("The limits on our jurisdiction are legal rules that define the nature and extent of the judicial power, not mere guidelines to be invoked or discarded at our whim."). And to give content to the text of the constitution, we turned to the traditional understanding of the judicial power, identifying long-established case law and constitutional history that informed the mootness doctrine's limitations on the judicial power.2  Utah Transit Auth., 2012 UT 75, ¶¶ 21-24, 289 P.3d 582.
 [*P69]  As set forth in detail below, an inquiry in this case following the model set out in Utah Transit Authority reveals that standing, like mootness, places well-defined, principled limitations on the scope of Article VIII's grant of judicial power.3  So, although our constitution does not limit our authority (as the federal constitution does) to the resolution of a "case or controversy," see supra ¶ 12 (noting this discrepancy), the lack of such restriction is hardly a carte blanche license to reach out to exercise any power we deem expedient.4  The separation-of-powers  limits on our authority are too important to be subsumed into a standardless evaluation of the significance of a party's underlying claims. If a party's standing turns on such an evaluation, our interpretation of the scope of our power will not be taken seriously, and we will leave ourselves open to the impression (if not the reality) of arbitrariness.
 [*P70]  Thus, I cannot accept the "public interest" test invoked by the court. I would instead interpret Article VIII of our constitution to confine the authority of the Utah courts to hear cases filed by private plaintiffs only where they vindicate "private rights," as that term was historically understood at the time of the framing of the Utah Constitution. That standard requires dismissal of all claims in this case for lack of standing.
 [*P71]  In the sections that follow, I set forth the historical basis for the standard I would adopt, show that this standard is compatible with most all of the holdings (but not some of the dicta) from our court on the law of standing, and explain why the citizen-plaintiffs in this case lack standing.
II. THE TRADITIONAL CONCEPTION OF STANDING
 [*P72]  Under the framework employed in Utah Transit Authority, we must take seriously our role of interpreting the judicial power clause of Article VIII. And in interpreting that clause, we must examine the traditional understanding of the judicial power, identifying limits on the judicial power in established case law and in our constitutional history. If the traditional standing requirement is rooted in the constitution, it cannot be seen as a mere salutary invention of this court or as a matter within our power to "relieve" a plaintiff of fulfilling. See supra ¶ 13.5  Instead, it must be understood as a constraint on the exercise of judicial power that we are duty-bound to follow—just as we are with any provision of the constitution—unless and until the people repeal or amend the terms of Article VIII. As detailed below, I would find that the standing limits on our judicial power are indeed constitutionally rooted. This conclusion necessarily forecloses the majority's approach—of announcing an evolving set of discretionary standards endorsing claimants we deem "appropriate" or claims we find within the "public interest."
 [*P73]  The starting point for this analysis, of course, is the text of Article VIII. That provision confers on our courts the "judicial power," and it speaks of our authority to issue "writs" and to decide "cases." Utah Const. art. VIII, §§ 1, 3, 5. These are definite terms with fixed content that place meaningful restrictions on the exercise of judicial power. First, because the power we wield must be "judicial," we are foreclosed from making law or announcing our views in an advisory or other non-judicial posture. See, e.g., Utah Transit Auth. v. Local 382 of the Amalgamated Transit Union, 2012 UT 75, ¶ 23, 289 P.3d 582.6  And second, our exercise  of the judicial power must be in the context of the issuance of "writs" or in our resolution of "cases," a formulation that implies a particular form for exercising the judicial power.7 
 [*P74]  Our interpretation of Article VIII, then, must be informed by an analysis of the traditional nature of the judicial power and of the types of writs and cases traditionally resolved in the courts. And in my view, the relevant history is clear. Established case law in Utah and elsewhere has long limited the judicial power to the resolution of suits brought by private parties in cases involving so-called "private rights."
 [*P75]  Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century precedent established important limitations on the sorts of writs and cases that could be initiated by private parties and entertained by courts. The traditional formulation in the case law uniformly held that suits involving "public rights"—interests held by the public generally and not by individuals—could not be initiated by private plaintiffs.8  Specifically, in actions involving criminal prosecutions, public nuisances, and writs of mandamus, the courts held that private individuals could not maintain actions vindicating public rights. For me, these cases establish a key element of the doctrine of standing as a gateway to the invocation of the judicial power: Private parties lack standing to sue to vindicate public rights, which must be asserted by government representatives and not by private individuals.9 
A. The Criminal Law Example
 [*P76]  Since before the founding of the Utah Constitution, it has been widely "understood [that] the tort action [is] under private control and the criminal action [is] under public control." Ann Woolhandler & Caleb Nelson, Does History Defeat Standing Doctrine?, 102 Mich. L. Rev. 689, 696 (2004).  Early American courts uniformly proscribed the private prosecution of criminal actions. Id. at 696-700.10  Concerns about giving private parties control over claims belonging to the general public drove this proscription. See Foute v. State, 4 Tenn. 98, 98-99 (1816). Courts feared that "leaving prosecutions to every attorney who will take a fee to prosecute" would frustrate "[t]he designs of the constitution" and permit "the innocent to be oppressed or vexatiously harassed" without "the responsibility imposed by the oath of the solicitor-general[,] by his selection for the discharge of these duties, [and] by the confidence of the public reposed in him." Id. at 99-100; see Markham v. Close, 2 La. 581, 587 (1831) (worrying that private prosecutions would reflect "the promptings of envy, malice, and all uncharitableness"). Thus, as the U.S. Supreme Court put it in 1842, "from the very nature of an indictment, and the sentence thereon, the government alone has the right to control the whole proceedings and execution of the sentence." United States v. Murphy, 41 U.S. (16 Pet.) 203, 209, 10 L. Ed. 937 (1842).
 [*P77]  Early Utah criminal law followed this pattern and confirms that actions by individuals to prosecute public wrongs are not within the judicial power. Utah courts carefully differentiated between the individual-specific harm typical to civil cases and the society-level harm involved in criminal matters. See Snow v. Snow, 43 P. 620, 622 (Utah 1896) (though a private party may benefit from a criminal contempt charge, it is imposed "to vindicate the authority and dignity of the people, as represented in and by their judicial tribunals"). Criminal process was appropriate for the latter, but not for the former. As one early opinion put it, "[criminal] punishment is not meted out as a 'balm to hurt mind.' Nor is there in the law aught of malice against him who is punished. The power is exercised by the court as the representative, in this respect, of the people,—the ultimate sovereigns,—and in their interest and for their good." In re Whitmore, 35 P. 524, 528-29 (Utah Terr. 1894) (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, territorial criminal statutes required "the prosecuting attorney, or other counsel for the people, [to] open the cause, and offer the evidence in support of the indictment." Territory v. Calton, 16 P. 902, 908 (Utah Terr. 1888) (quoting Crim. Code Laws Utah § 257(2), (5), (6) (1878)), rev'd on other grounds by Calton v. Utah, 130 U.S. 83 (1889). Though courts allowed private counsel to aid public prosecutors during trial, People v. Tidwell, 12 P. 61, 64 (Utah Terr. 1886), I can find no instance of a private party indicting or trying a criminal suspect independent of state involvement. This is just the first of several indications that in the era of the founding of the Utah Constitution, the judicial power was understood to restrict the vindication of public rights to public officials—and to do so on the basis of a concern about the capacity of private litigants to account for the public weal and without regard to the importance of the issue involved.
B. Nuisance Law
 [*P78]  This limitation was not confined to criminal prosecutions, however. Under the law of "public nuisance," for example, early American courts enforced the familiar principle that "[t]he public authorities alone can complain of nuisances, while they remain public or general." Seeley v. Bishop, 19 Conn. 128, 135 (1848).11  And this rule was rooted in a broader principle: "Upon general principles, that common interest, which belongs equally to all, and in which the parties suing have no special or peculiar property, will not maintain a suit." Barr v. Stevens, 4 Ky. (1 Bibb.) 292, 293 (1808).
 [*P79]  Again, moreover, the proscription of private prosecution of public rights was justified  by concerns about private parties' incapacity to account for broader societal interests. Thus, common-law commentators noted the need for "avoiding multiplicity of suits"12  and of limiting defendants' exposure to a single proceeding filed by public authorities rather than allowing "every subject in the kingdome . . . to harass the offender with separate actions."13 
 [*P80]  Though the public nuisance rule was subject to an exception, the exception itself only confirmed the public-/private-rights distinction. It held that a public nuisance action could be maintained where the nuisance resulted in "special damage" to the plaintiff—"an injury different in kind from that of which the public complains."14  The law in this area was settled at the time of the founding of the Utah Constitution. As William Hale put it in a treatise penned at about the time our Utah framers established our founding document,
[t]he interest which an individual has in common with all other citizens or members of the state or municipality is insufficient to authorize him to maintain an action founded upon a public wrong affecting the people at large in the same manner. A party cannot vindicate the rights of others by process in his own name, nor employ civil process to punish wrongs to the public.
William B. Hale, Parties to Actions, in 15 Encyclopedia of Pleading and Practice 456, 472-73 (William M. McKinney ed., N.Y., Edward Thompson Co. 1899) (footnote omitted).
 [*P81]  Utah's early nuisance law is identical, in that it held that "private individuals . . . [could] not champion purely public rights." Lewis v. Pingree Nat'l Bank, 151 P. 558, 561 (Utah 1915). Our early cases indicate that "[n]o doubt the rule is well established that private persons may not invoke the aid of the courts to abate public nuisances, unless they can show that they suffer some special or peculiar injury or damage which is not common to the rest of the community." Id.; Startup v. Harmon, 203 P. 637, 640 (Utah 1921) (same). Not only was the plaintiff required to show special injury, but that injury was also required to be "different not merely in degree but in kind from that suffered by the public at large." Muir v. Kay, 244 P. 901, 905 (Utah 1925) (internal quotation marks omitted). If a different rule obtained, "a discharge in one case would be no bar to another, and thus there would be no end to litigation." Id. This precedent thus illustrates that, at and near the founding of the Utah Constitution, suits brought by private individuals to redress public wrongs were not the kind of "cases" subject to the judicial power.
C. Mandamus
 [*P82]  Early mandamus actions in other jurisdictions conform with this understanding. The general rule was consistent with the practice of reserving "public" claims for public officials and allowing private suits only for special, individualized injuries. Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw articulated this principle as "[u]ndoubtedly" the law in Massachusetts: "[A] private individual can apply for a writ of mandamus only in a case where he has some private or particular interest to be subserved, or some particular right to be pursued or protected by the aid of this process, independent of that which he holds in common with the public at large; and it is for the public officers exclusively to apply, where public rights are to be subserved." In re , 33 Mass. (16 Pick.) 87, 105, 16 Pick. 87 (1834).
 [*P83]  Utah's judicial ancestry is in line with the approach prescribed by Chief Justice Shaw and squarely supports the limitation on our power overridden by the majority today. Specifically, Utah's early mandamus cases required plaintiffs to show that they had "some peculiar interest separate and distinct from that of the community in general." Startup, 203 P. at 640. Only then could the plaintiff satisfy Utah statutory law allowing mandamus to issue for "part[ies] beneficially interested." See  Crockett v. Bd. of Educ., 199 P. 158, 159-61 (Utah 1921). In Crockett, this court noted that "there are no fixed rules for determining" who is a beneficially interested party, but also confirmed that
[a]ll agree . . . that mandamus proceedings should not be upheld on the part of an individual who, under the guise of correcting official delinquencies, uses the writ merely as a means of vexing and annoying public officials when he has no special or peculiar interest, as distinguished from that of the general community.
Id. at 160. With this in mind, the court in Crockett granted a taxpayer's writ to compel a school board to publish statutorily required annual financial statements because the statute involved "was designed for the benefit and interests of the citizen taxpayers so that they [could] be informed as to whether or not the financial affairs of the school district each year have been properly and lawfully conducted on the part of the board of education." Id. at 159-60.
 [*P84]  In Startup, by contrast, the court rejected the standing of a taxpayer who sought to command a county to satisfy a statutory duty to provide funds to support widowed mothers. 203 P. at 638. The court's opinion in Startup analyzed the standing of a mandamus petitioner in a manner consistent with public nuisance standing: "If the nuisance affects him only in the same manner and to the same extent that it affects the people of the community in general, it is an elementary rule of practice that he would have no standing as a plaintiff in such proceeding. If, however, he is peculiarly affected or injured by the nuisance, then, under all the authorities, he has the right to institute an action in his own name to abate the nuisance." Id. at 640.
 [*P85]  Applying these principles, the Startup court dismissed the petitioner's claim for lack of standing because the petitioner was not part of the class protected or benefited by the statute (widowed mothers), but was instead a member of "the community in general" who "ha[d] no greater interest than any other resident." Id. at 640-41. Distinguishing Crockett, the court reiterated that the petitioner in that case had "come within the class of persons . . . specially interested in the relief applied for"—residents of a particular school district. Id. at 641. At the same time, the court doubted that standing would have been found in Crockett had the taxpayer not been such a resident. Id. In such case, the Crockett taxpayer would have been similar to the Startup petitioner—no more than "interested as a citizen in seeing that the law was enforced." See id.
 [*P86]  Seeing "no reason" in law to sustain standing by a citizen merely interested in assuring the enforcement of the law, the court rejected the Startup petitioner's standing. Id. In so doing, the court noted that "[a]ny widowed mother of the class mentioned, for whose relief the law was enacted, would undoubtedly have the right to apply for a writ of mandate to compel an enforcement of the law," and that "[a]ny attorney authorized to represent the county . . . would have the right . . . to institute [a] proceeding." Id. But a "person whose relation to the case" is merely that of a citizen seeking enforcement of the law could not be sustained without "set[ting] at naught" the rules of standing in mandamus.15  Id.
  D. The Root of Standing Doctrine
 [*P87]  This historical practice of differentiating between public and private rights is fundamental. The above-cited cases distinguishing private and public rights represent not just a traditional policy preference for public control over public actions, but a principle long understood to define and establish limits on the judicial power.
 [*P88]  Prohibiting private parties from vindicating grievances shared by the general community plays an important role in maintaining the separation of powers.16  Thus, in the era leading up to the founding of the Utah Constitution, American courts widely accepted the public-/private-rights distinction as an element of "standing" or a limit on the gateway to the judicial power.17  Respect for that principle is essential to honoring constitutional limits on the powers of the judicial branch of government.
 [*P89]  When we exceed our constitutional authority, we necessarily tread on ground that belongs to a coordinate branch of government. As we noted in Jenkins v. Swan, "[t]he requirement that a plaintiff have a personal stake in the outcome of a dispute is intended to confine the courts to a role consistent with the separation of powers, and to limit the jurisdiction of the courts to those disputes which are most efficiently and effectively resolved through the judicial process." 675 P.2d 1145, 1149 (Utah 1983). And as we explained in Baird v. State, "[t]o grant standing to a litigant, who cannot distinguish himself from all citizens, would be a significant inroad on the representative form of government, and cast the courts in the role of supervising the coordinate branches of government." 574 P.2d 713, 717 (Utah 1978).
 [*P90]  When a dispute implicates commonly held public rights, the prerogative to advocate that interest belongs to the body politic generally, not to private individuals. And the advocacy of such public rights belongs either to government representatives suing for the public in court, or to the representative branches of government. As we put it in Jenkins v. Swan, "the airing of generalized grievances and the vindication of public rights are properly addressed to the legislature, a forum where freewheeling debate on broad issues of public policy is in order." 675 P.2d at 1149-50.
 [*P91]  We cannot simultaneously honor these fundamental restraints on our power while defining that power through ad hoc, discretionary standards rooted in our sense of the  "importance" of or "public interest" in the issues presented. See Utah Transit Auth., 2012 UT 75, ¶¶ 17, 32, n.18 (rejecting freestanding "public interest" exception to the mootness doctrine; noting that the doctrine is not a "principle of our own creation" which we may "abolish . . . at our whim, on the ground . . . that the question presented is sufficiently important or interesting to merit our attention").18  These are not legal restraints on our power. They are a hollow assurance that we will exercise it only where we think it is expedient to do so. That is troubling, as it threatens to blur the lines of standing with our views on the underlying merits.
 [*P92]  We should repudiate the public interest approach and reiterate and clarify the traditional formulation of the doctrine of standing. We should decide this case in accordance with that traditional formulation.
III. PUBLIC INTEREST STANDING IN UTAH CASES
 [*P93]  Our modern standing cases do not foreclose the approach I advocate; they leave plenty of room for faithful adherence to the traditional standing formulation. Prior to today's decision, our cases have only occasionally adverted to a "public interest" notion of standing, and almost always in dicta (as an alternative to traditional standing). Today the court crosses a significant, problematic line. It extends the dicta in our cases to a square holding, and does so in a manner that deprives the limits of the public interest exception of any meaningful content.
A. The Private Right Limitation in Our Law
 [*P94]  The holdings in most of our cases (if not always the dicta) have effectively maintained traditional limitations on standing. In Jenkins v. Swan, for example, we foreclosed standing in cases where "other potential plaintiffs with a more direct interest in [the] particular question" exist. 675 P.2d 1145, 1151 (Utah 1983). This holding appropriately prefers parties that meet traditional standing requirements. See id. at 1150 ("[T]his Court will not readily relieve a plaintiff of the . . . requirement of showing a real and personal interest in the dispute."); York v. Unqualified Wash. Cnty. Elected Officials, 714 P.2d 679, 680 (Utah 1986) (per curiam).
 [*P95]  We departed from that approach to some extent in Utah Chapter of the Sierra Club v. Utah Air Quality Board, 2006 UT 74, 148 P.3d 960, where we outlined the parameters of an expanded "public right" standing. But that discussion was dicta and not controlling. Because the plaintiff satisfied traditional standing requirements, the court did not need to opine about an alternative (public right) standing test. See id. ¶ 32.19 
 [*P96]  To my knowledge, we have only once employed the Sierra Club dicta in a case where we found traditional standing lacking: in City of Grantsville v. Redevelopment Agency of Tooele City, 2010 UT 38, ¶ 16, 233 P.3d 461. In that case, we upheld a municipality's "alternative" standing to litigate a contract matter involving a claim for breach of a development agreement. Id. Yet although the City of Grantsville opinion upholds Grantsville City's standing on public interest grounds, id., that conclusion was again unnecessary. The city, after all, was a signatory to the agreement with an express right to receive proceeds of the development, and as such it was unquestionably a third- party beneficiary20  with a traditional, private-right interest in the contract dispute.21  See id. ¶¶ 4, 6.
 [*P97]  In City of Grantsville the court claimed not to reach the third-party beneficiary basis for standing. See id. ¶ 14 & n.2 (acknowledging that third-party beneficiaries have traditional standing to sue under a contract, but concluding not to "address this issue" because Grantsville City "does not argue it"). But in my view the court necessarily (if implicitly) relied on this ground, as Grantsville City's third-party beneficiary status is the only plausible legal basis for its standing.
 [*P98]  For one thing, the City's failure to cite a third-party beneficiary basis for its standing could not have been dispositive. Standing is jurisdictional and is thus a matter the court has an obligation to consider sua sponte. Utah Transit Auth. v. Local 382 of the Amalgamated Transit Union, 2012 UT 75, ¶ 26, 289 P.3d 582 & n.17. And once we determine to reach an issue, we can hardly be required to blind ourselves from considering authority of relevance to its resolution.22  So we were not at all foreclosed from relying on the city's third-party beneficiary status in upholding its standing.
 [*P99]  And in my view the court must have relied on that status in its decision. A complete stranger to a contract would never be granted standing to sue to enforce it. See Hooban v. Unicity Int'l, Inc., 2012 UT 40, ¶ 24, 285 P.3d 766 ("[Plaintiff] was deemed a stranger to the contract, and as such he had no rights to enforce it or obligations under it."). And the enforcement of a mere contract is not a matter of fundamental public importance; surely it is less so than the constitutional claims under Article X deemed insufficient by the majority today. See supra ¶ 35. So even the City of Grantsville opinion is not really authority for public interest standing generally (and certainly not public interest standing in contract actions brought by third parties); it is better viewed as endorsing the standing of a named third-party beneficiary who failed to press a third-party beneficiary argument.
 [*P100]  This case is thus a significant milestone. It marks the first time the court has endorsed a general theory of public interest standing in a square holding. That holding is problematic on many levels. In addition to ignoring the traditional limits on our authority under Article VIII, the public interest exception undermines at least two strands of our case law requiring a real party in interest to bring its own claims.
 [*P101]  First, rule 17 of the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure requires that "[e]very action shall be prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest." Standing overlaps with the real party in interest requirement "inasmuch as both terms are used to designate a plaintiff who possesses a sufficient interest in the action to be entitled to be heard on the merits." 6A Charles A. Wright Et Al., Federal Practice and Procedure § 1542 (3d ed. 2012). Courts generally define a real party in interest as "the person who is the true owner of the right sought to be enforced." See Pillsbury Co. v. Wells Dairy, Inc., 752 N.W.2d 430, 435 (Iowa 2008) (internal quotation marks omitted). So, even if a merely "competent" or "appropriate" party could establish standing under the proposed "public interest" principle, it would have to satisfy other rules governing parties in dispute, including the requirement that it be the  true owner of the right sought to be enforced.23 
 [*P102]  Second, we have traditionally limited a litigant's ability to assert a third party's rights. See Shelledy v. Lore, 836 P.2d 786, 789 (Utah 1992). Third-party vindication of another's rights is generally proper only if "some substantial relationship between the claimant and the third parties [exists]," if it is impossible for the rightholders to assert their own constitutional rights, and if the third parties' constitutional rights would be diluted "were the assertion of jus tertii not permitted." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted)
 [*P103]  We have recognized these limitations for good reason. As the U.S. Supreme Court has explained, "'courts should not adjudicate [a third party's] rights unnecessarily," as "it may be that in fact the holders of those rights . . . do not wish to assert them'" and the "third parties themselves usually will be the best proponents of their own rights." Wilderness Soc. v. Kane Cnty., 632 F.3d 1162, 1171-72 (10th Cir. 2011) (second alteration in original) (quoting Singleton v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 113, 96 S. Ct. 2868, 49 L. Ed. 2d 826 (1976)).24  Thus, courts "should prefer to construe legal rights only when the most effective advocates of those rights are before them." Id. at 1172 (internal quotation marks omitted).
 [*P104]  I dissent because I see no basis in our precedent or elsewhere for abandoning these principles. I find no comfort in the fact that the approach embraced by the majority today "is not unusual in state jurisprudence." Supra ¶ 16. That is apparently true. But it is also beside the point if the trends in caselaw outside of Utah are incompatible with the provisions of the law that we are bound to enforce. And that is exactly how I see the authority before us.
 [*P105]  The state precedent cited by the majority rests entirely on the faulty premise of "standing" as a judge-made principle of prudential restraint. In adopting a public interest conception of standing, these state courts have routinely ignored the governing constitutional language—with the dismissive assertion that the federal "case or controversy" limitation is not a part of the state judicial power clause. See supra ¶ 16 (noting that the cited opinions are "mindful that their constitutions do not impose the same restrictions on their judicial power that the federal constitution imposes on federal courts"). For reasons I've explained above, the conclusion (of unbridled, common-law power) does not at all follow from the premise (the lack of a "case or controversy" clause). Thus, the court may find persuasive the notion of standing in state court as "'a self-imposed rule of restraint'" or a "'judge-made doctrine'" that "'free[s]'" state courts to "'reject procedural frustrations in favor of'" their own subjective sense of what is a "'just and expeditious.'" Supra ¶ 16 n.10 (quoting 59 Am. Jur. 2D Parties § 30 (2012)). But I find them helpful only in highlighting the problematic foundation of the public interest doctrine of standing. We should reject that doctrine and instead follow the traditional formulation of standing that is deeply rooted in the holdings of our cases and in the text of Article VIII.
B. The Majority's Eradication of a Meaningful "Public Interest" Standard
 [*P106]  In upholding plaintiffs' standing to assert their Article VI claims in this case, the court not only invokes the "public interest" exception in a square holding; it stretches the exception in a manner that erases all meaningful limits on the doctrine of standing. The majority heralds its intent to preserve "strict standards" in a manner that "avoid[s] the temptation to apply a judge's own beliefs and philosophies to a determination of what questions are of great public importance."  Supra ¶ 32 n.18 (internal quotation marks omitted). Yet the court's variation on the public interest standard eliminates any real limits, strict or otherwise, leaving the applicability of the exception to the court's unbridled discretion.
 [*P107]  First, in repudiating any requirement that the plaintiff be a traditional claimant with an individual injury—or even the "most appropriate party," as our prior dicta sometimes suggested25  — the court effectively abandons any threshold limitation based on the plaintiff's stake in the outcome of the case. The court articulates this element in terms that require a determination that the plaintiff is "'an appropriate party.'" Supra ¶ 15 (quoting Cedar Mountain Envtl., Inc. v. Tooele Cnty. ex rel. Tooele Cnty. Comm'n, 2009 UT 48, ¶ 8, 214 P.3d 95 (emphasis omitted)). But this inquiry is hardly a "test." It seems to me that it is more of a post-hoc passing grade—one crafted to justify the court's ultimate determination to reach the merits of the case.
 [*P108]  That becomes clear when the court actually applies the test. In deeming plaintiffs "appropriate," the court says nothing that couldn't be said about any litigant with the resources to hire effective counsel (and with even the most remote interest). Perhaps it's true that plaintiffs have "done an admirable job of briefing the facts and controlling law" in this case, supra ¶ 29, but that is no meaningful gateway to standing. Nor is the fact that the plaintiffs have "policy concerns" and are "focus[ed] on the instant constitutional challenge." Supra ¶ 29 (internal quotation marks omitted). We should require (and almost always have required) more from litigants than a showing that they are deeply worried about the case before us. Finally, the fact that plaintiffs "have caused this court to consider" the Article VI issues they have raised and to "clarify the standards they impose for the first time in decades" may ultimately be an "achievement." Supra ¶ 29.26  But if so, it is a circular achievement of the court's own making. The fact that the court ultimately considered the issues presented cannot itself be a justification for agreeing to consider the issues. Plaintiffs have achieved standing only because we granted it to them. It is a bootstrap to commend that "achievement" as a basis for upholding standing.
 [*P109]  The court cements the circularity of its test in its articulation of the second step of the analysis. While acknowledging the existence of plaintiffs with concrete interests in suing to challenge SB 2 (such as teachers who fail to qualify for a salary supplement under the statute or textbook publishers whose books are not approved by the statutory approval program), the court dismisses these "hypothetical" plaintiffs as irrelevant—asserting that their failure to file suit to date is enough to render "unlikely" a lawsuit by these parties. Supra ¶ 30. This is a striking—and deeply troubling—step in our public interest standing jurisprudence. Before today, the question was not whether directly affected parties had filed suit, but whether they existed. See Haymond v. Bonneville ., 2004 UT 27, ¶ 10, 89 P.3d 171 (denying "public interest" standing because two classes of potential plaintiffs existed that were in a better position to bring suit). If the failure of real parties in interest to file suit is enough to sustain recognition of a member of the general public to step in as an "appropriate" party, we have defined the gateway to the judicial power out of existence.27  We have assured that the jurisdictional threshold to the Utah courts depends only our subjective determination to hear a case even absent the presence of the claimant with a traditional stake in filing it.
 [*P110]  Finally, the court's test is also circular in its assessment of the ultimate question of whether the Article VI claims asserted by plaintiffs are "of sufficient importance and general interest that claims of their violation may be brought even by plaintiffs who lack standing under the traditional criteria." Supra ¶ 27. Except to conclude that the Article VI issues are "part of the fundamental structure of legislative power articulated in our constitution," supra ¶ 27, the court offers no justification for deeming this element satisfied. And the court's further explication of the point only confirms its analytical emptiness. I see no rational, articulable basis for deeming the Article VI issues sufficiently important while rejecting the Article X issues on this score.
 [*P111]  It is hardly an answer to note that "[n]ot every constitutional provision" is sufficiently important. Supra ¶ 27. That only begs the question of which ones clear the bar—and of the theoretical basis for setting the bar, or the level at which it is set. In begging these questions, the court has evaluated the importance element entirely within the confines of a black box. That not only deprives the parties in this case of an understanding of the basis of the court's decision; it also withholds from lower courts the tools needed to make these determinations going forward.
 [*P112]  The hollow nature of the majority's standing analysis is confirmed by the court's ultimate rejection of public interest standing for the Article X claims. The court's proffered rationale—that the Article VI claims involve "restrictions which must be observed every time the legislature exercises its core function of passing laws" while the Article X claims involve a mere "a delegation of a defined subject to particular agency," supra ¶ 36,—is misdirection at best. Surely abiding by the constitution's power-allocation scheme is part of the legislature's "core function" that must be considered each time a law is passed. And the majority's refusal to "conclude that such questions can never be appropriate ones in which to employ the public—interest standing doctrine" only bears that out and emphasizes the standardless quality of this doctrine. Supra ¶ 36. Either the violation of a constitutional provision is important or it is not. Its importance cannot depend on the identity of the plaintiffs or the circumstances of each case, as the majority implies. Supra ¶ 36.
 [*P113]  In all, the majority's distinction between the Article VI and Article X claims does not spring from meaningful analysis. It is an attempt to paper over an ultimate conclusion28 —the court's preference for reaching  one set of claims (under Article VI) while declining to reach others (under Article X).29 
 [*P114]  The exercise of unfettered discretion is troubling, especially on a matter constituting a limit on our power under the Utah Constitution. As we explained in Utah Transit Authority, "on matters affecting the scope of our own power or jurisdiction, our duty to vigilantly follow the strictures of the constitution is a matter of great significance." 2012 UT 75, ¶ 26 . We ignore that responsibility when we treat the constitutional limits on our power as "mere matter[s] of convenience or judicial discretion." Id. ¶ 27. And we undermine the fundamental notion of a written constitution when we adopt jurisdictional standards that show no fidelity to that document and seize unbridled "discretion to decide which cases should be spun out and which cut off based on some vague sense of fairness or importance of the issue." Id.
 [*P115]  The public interest notion of standing cannot stand in the face of these principles. The court's extension of this doctrine here is particularly problematic, as it cements the public interest exception in a square holding, and in a manner that assures arbitrariness in its application going forward.
IV. THE TRADITIONAL STANDING TEST APPLIED HERE
 [*P116]  For all these reasons, we should reinforce the constitutional basis for our traditional conception of standing and repudiate the public interest exception as incompatible with our constitutional tradition. And we should vacate and dismiss this case for lack of standing.
 [*P117]  The Article VI claims at issue here are prototypical, generalized grievances. Plaintiffs have asserted no injury peculiar to them—no interest or stake beyond that of all Utah citizens. They are complaining about the process that resulted in the enactment of SB 2—a process allegedly lacking the clear title and single subject required by the Utah Constitution—and not an unlawful impact of the legislation on them as private individuals.
 [*P118]  Thus, plaintiffs are not individuals or entities with a direct stake in challenging SB 2, like the affected teachers or book publishers identified by the majority. Supra ¶ 30. They are Utah taxpayers asserting a generalized challenge to the propriety of the legislative process culminating in SB 2. Their standing cannot be upheld under our historical standing caselaw without doing serious violence to their core principle. See supra ¶¶ 72-92. They lack standing on that basis, and their case should be dismissed.
 [*P119]   The Article X claims, on the other hand, do not belong to the plaintiffs who seek to litigate them. The Utah Board of Education is the real party in interest. We should not allow vaguely interested individuals to assert and litigate to protect the rights of a state body when that body has declined—for whatever reason—to take action.30  The plaintiffs have not established that the Board of Education cannot properly protect its own rights. Nor have they asserted a valid, particularized injury stemming from the condemned legislation. Thus, I would dismiss both claims because they implicate the rights of third parties who are the real parties in interest, and because the plaintiffs who seek to advance these claims cannot establish their own individual standing or satisfy the elements of the doctrine of third-party standing.
 [*P120]  This is not the sort of case where the plaintiffs before the court are the only kinds of parties who could conceivably litigate this kind of action. Clearly there are plaintiffs out there with a direct interest in these suits—textbook publishers, science teachers, and the State Board of Education, for example. Those plaintiffs have elected not to sue. That seems significant. We should not broaden the field of proper plaintiffs just because we wish that the directly interested parties had filed suit, or because we think the issues at stake seem important or interesting. The judicial power is confined to the resolution of disputes between the parties who have a direct stake in the outcome. The plaintiffs who filed these cases do not qualify under that rubric.
 [*P121]  The bounds of our judicial power cannot accommodate the kind of expansion that "public right" standing for merely "competent" plaintiffs involves. We cannot properly allow less than directly interested parties to litigate before us. To do so risks unrestrained decision-making based on underdeveloped facts and law and ultimately against the will and rights of those directly harmed.31  It also risks invasion of the province of the legislature. Public dispute resolution is beyond our constitutional authority in a case filed by private plaintiffs.

 

