 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P37]  I agree with and concur in the court's judgment affirming the dismissal of Mark Haik's statutory and constitutional claims. I also concur in much of the majority opinion. I write separately, however, because I find unnecessary the court's discussion of "public interest" standing. See supra ¶¶ 23-27. This doctrine rests on shaky constitutional footing. See Gregory v. Shurtleff, 2013 UT 18, ¶¶ 87-91, 299 P.3d 1098 (Lee, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part, joined by Durrant, C.J.) (concluding that the public interest standing doctrine is incompatible with the judicial power clause of article VIII of the Utah Constitution). And I would not reinforce it here as the application of this doctrine is not properly presented for our decision.
 [*P38]  I would hold that Haik lacks standing to assert his statutory and constitutional claims on the ground that he is not "[a] person aggrieved by an order of the state engineer." Utah Code § 73-3-14(1)(a). And I would affirm the dismissal of Haik's constitutional claim on the alternative ground (endorsed by the majority) that he "cannot press [a] constitutional claim as part of a challenge to a change application" under the governing statute. Supra ¶¶ 28-33. These grounds for decision obviate the need for us to consider or apply the doctrine of public interest standing. And I would stop short of so doing because the doctrine is problematic and not necessary to our decision.
I
 [*P39]  To have standing to assert a claim a plaintiff must clear two hurdles. The first hurdle emanates from the law that establishes the plaintiff's right of action—the common law, a statute, or the constitution. If the plaintiff is asserting a statutory claim, for example, he has standing only if he is within the class of parties that the legislature authorized to file suit.8  This is sometimes called "statutory standing."9 
 [*P40]   The second hurdle is constitutional. Even if the plaintiff has a statutory right to sue he may lack standing if he does not meet the constitutional requirements for standing.10  Under our cases the "traditional" standing test requires proof that the plaintiff suffered a "distinct and palpable injury that gives rise to a personal stake in the outcome of the dispute." Wash. Cty. Water Conservancy Dist. v. Morgan, 2003 UT 58, ¶¶ 14, 20, 82 P.3d 1125. A majority of the court has also endorsed an alternative test under the constitution—for "public interest standing." Gregory v. Shurtleff, 2013 UT 18, ¶¶ 16, 18, 299 P.3d 1098 (citations omitted).
 [*P41]  If a plaintiff is asserting a statutory claim the constitutional standing question arises if and only if the plaintiff has statutory standing. If the plaintiff is not within the class of parties that the legislature has authorized to file suit, it does not matter whether that plaintiff could identify some sort of "distinct and palpable injury" or a basis for "public interest" standing. See, e.g., In re Questar Gas Co., 2007 UT 79, ¶ 57, 175 P.3d 545 (concluding that an "aggrieved" party did not have standing because it "d[id] not fall within the classes of persons to whom standing is granted").11  Constitutional standing is a backstop, in other words—a set of secondary requirements that are relevant only if the plaintiff can first show that the legislature has authorized him to file suit (otherwise constitutional standing would be a backdoor basis for overriding legislative intent; and that is not the point of constitutional standing.12 ).
II
 [*P42]  This means that the threshold question for our decision is whether Haik has a statutory right to challenge the state engineer's order. He does not. By statute only "[a]  person aggrieved" by an order of the state engineer is authorized by the legislature to sue. Utah Code § 73-3-14(1)(a). And Haik is not a "person aggrieved." See supra ¶¶ 20, 36.
 [*P43]  This conclusion follows from the standard set forth in our opinion in Washington County Water Conservancy District v. Morgan, 2003 UT 58, 82 P.3d 1125. In that case we held that the legislature has confined the right to challenge an order of the state engineer to those who have suffered a particularized injury. Id. ¶ 14 (finding "nothing in the statutory framework to suggest a legislative attempt to grant a right of judicial review to those who can show no [particularized] grievance or injury"); id. ¶ 16 ("[e]quating the statutory term 'aggrieved' with the traditional standing requirement of particularized injury"). We held that a mere "interested" party lacking a particularized injury does not qualify as a "person aggrieved by an order of the state engineer" under Utah Code section 73-3-14(1)(a). Id. ¶ 14. And we tied that conclusion to the operative language of the statute. Id. ¶¶ 11, 14.
 [*P44]  Salt Lake City has asked us to reject Haik's public interest standing argument on this basis. It cites the above analysis in the Washington County case. And it asserts that "Haik offers no authority for his apparent position that the common-law doctrine of public interest standing can displace the statutory requirement in UAPA that a person be an 'aggrieved party' in order to seek judicial review."
 [*P45]  That seems exactly right. I would endorse that view. I would conclude only that Haik lacks statutory standing because he does not fall within the class of plaintiffs entitled to file suit in a case like this one. And I would not proceed to analyze the question whether Haik could qualify for public interest standing.

 

