 in part and dissenting in part:
 [*P114]  The majority does an admirable job of bringing order and clarity to a complex case. I agree with and concur in most of the majority opinion and in Justice Himonas's concurrence. Our only point of disagreement stems from their analysis relating to tribal exhaustion and their conclusions affected by that analysis. Unlike the majority and concurrence, I find no basis in federal law for a rule forcing the plaintiffs to "exhaust" their claims by filing suit in tribal court. No party to this case has ever sought to invoke the jurisdiction of the tribal courts. The plaintiffs chose this forum and the defendants apparently agree—they have not initiated a declaratory proceeding in tribal court. And I see no basis for the court's decision to override the parties' choice of this Utah forum.
 [*P115]  The U.S. Supreme Court has imposed an exhaustion requirement in a line of cases in which (a) one of the parties has invoked the jurisdiction of the tribal courts and (b)  another party has filed suit in federal court (which retains appellate jurisdiction over the tribal court). See Iowa Mut. Ins. Co. v. LaPlante, 480 U.S. 9, 107 S. Ct. 971, 94 L. Ed. 2d 10 (1987); Nat'l Farmers Union Ins. Cos. v. Crow Tribe of Indians, 471 U.S. 845, 105 S. Ct. 2447, 85 L. Ed. 2d 818 (1985). But there is no binding authority extending the exhaustion requirement to a case like this one, in which neither of these elements is met. And I would not adopt such a requirement here.
 [*P116]  Our system yields to parties the general prerogative of choosing an appropriate forum.1  When the parties file suit in a court that has both subject-matter jurisdiction over the dispute and personal jurisdiction over the parties, our courts have a general duty to exercise that jurisdiction.2  This is no arbitrary rule. It is a core premise of our judicial system—a premise aimed at protecting the federal constitutional right to due process and the state constitutional right to open access to court. U.S. Const. amend. V; Utah Const. art. I, § 11.
 [*P117]  These general rules are subject to exceptions. One exception is set forth in the above-cited cases. These cases establish a requirement of exhaustion as a matter of federal Indian law—a rule that "directs a federal court to stay its hand" in the face of a pending tribal court action "in order to give the tribal court a 'full opportunity to determine its own jurisdiction.'" LaPlante, 480 U.S. at 16 (quoting Nat'l Farmers Union, 471 U.S. at 857). This requirement, however, has never been extended to a case like this one. And I see no reason to do so.
 [*P118]  For reasons set forth below I would not hold that the exhaustion rule announced by the U.S. Supreme Court extends to cases in which the parties are litigating their differences in state court and no party has yet invoked the jurisdiction of a tribal court. First, I see no basis for the conclusion that the principles set forth in LaPlante apply with equal force in a case involving the interplay between tribal courts and state courts. Second, and in any event, I see no basis for extending the LaPlante doctrine of exhaustion to a case in which there is no pending proceeding in the tribal forum. In the absence of a binding federal rule I would approach the question presented as a matter of comity addressed to our common law authority.3  And under that authority I would conclude that our courts should stay our exercise of jurisdiction only after one of the parties has invoked the jurisdiction of the tribal courts.
I
 [*P119]  I find no basis in federal law for a rule of exhaustion that is binding on state courts. A few lower courts have held that the logic and some dicta in LaPlante and National Farmers Union suggest that the exhaustion principle ought to extend to state court proceedings.4  But the U.S. Supreme  Court has never considered the question before us.5  Its cases, to date, have all involved the interplay between actions filed in federal court and competing cases filed in tribal court.6 
 [*P120]  Justice Himonas cites Nevada v. Hicks, 533 U.S. 353, 121 S. Ct. 2304, 150 L. Ed. 2d 398 (2001), and LaPlante, 480 U.S. at 16, for the proposition that the U.S. Supreme Court's "tribal exhaustion rule" governs "'the relationship between tribal courts and state and federal courts.'" Supra ¶ 93 (quoting Hicks, 533 U.S. at 398). But the cited language from Hicks comes from Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion. And neither case is addressed to the question of relevance here—of whether federal law requires state courts to stay their hand in anticipation of a tribal court proceeding that might be filed.7  That is also true of every other tribal court exhaustion case decided by the Supreme Court. So any broad language in the court's opinions, like that in LaPlante, is pure dicta. See LaPlante, 480 U.S. at 16 (speaking of an exhaustion rule applying to "any nontribal court").
 [*P121]  And there is reason to believe that the broad dicta should not extend to a case like that presented here. Indeed the terms and structure of the LaPlante opinion cut against this extension. LaPlante speaks of "exhaustion." Exhaustion, moreover, is a principle that regulates the timing of proceedings in tribunals that operate in a hierarchical relationship.8  We speak of exhaustion of administrative remedies, for example, as a rule requiring a party challenging the actions of an administrative agency to raise and resolve its claims in the administrative agency before it may raise them in a judicial proceeding.9  Exhaustion in habeas corpus proceedings is similar. Petitioners in state custody must exhaust available state court procedures before pursuing review in federal court.10 
 [*P122]  The exhaustion question presented in LaPlante is along these same lines. In holding that the plaintiff was required to "exhaust available tribal remedies" before pressing  its suit in federal court, the court also recognized that if the tribal courts concluded that they had jurisdiction the parties retained the right to "challenge that ruling" by seeking direct review in an action filed "in the [federal] District Court." 480 U.S. at 19. This is the notion of "exhaustion"—the requirement of completing litigation filed in a lower tribunal before seeking ultimate review in a higher one.
 [*P123]  "Due to th[e] relationship" between tribal and federal courts,11  a plaintiff may not file an action arguably subject to the jurisdiction of the tribal courts "directly in federal court . . . without first exhausting such recourse as is available in Indian courts." Astorga v. Wing, 211 Ariz. 139, 118 P.3d 1103, 1107 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2005). This is the essence of the LaPlante rule of exhaustion. And it is not implicated in a case in which there is no hierarchical relationship between the two sovereign courts—and thus no right of direct review.12 See Astorga, 118 P.3d at 1107 (concluding that the "principle of exhaustion" announced in LaPlante "does not apply" to a case filed in state court).13 
 [*P124]  Justice Himonas says that the applicability of the LaPlante principle of exhaustion to state court proceedings is resolved by "fundamental principles of Indian law" announced by the Supreme Court and reiterated in federal statutes. Supra ¶ 96. I disagree. It should first be reiterated that there is no controlling authority on this issue. The Supreme Court has never considered the important question presented here.
 [*P125]  Granted, the court has spoken generally about the federal "'policy of leaving Indians free from state jurisdiction and control.'" Supra ¶ 96 (quoting Rice v. Olson, 324 U.S. 786, 789, 65 S. Ct. 989, 89 L. Ed. 1367 (1945)). But these generalities tell us nothing about the key questions presented—as to how far that policy goes and how to balance it against countervailing considerations. This case presents fundamental policy questions of sovereignty and concurrent jurisdiction. Those questions are not resolved by precedent. And in the absence of controlling federal precedent this is a matter of first-impression for our decision.14 
 [*P126]   The cited federal statutes—the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C. § 1901 et seq., and the Major Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1153 et seq.—do not establish federal law requiring state courts to stay our exercise of jurisdiction in anticipation of a future-filed action in the courts of an independent (Indian) sovereign. Indeed these statutes seem to me to underscore the lack of any such federal rule. If Congress meant for both federal and state courts to yield to tribal courts in every circumstance where tribal courts have a colorable claim of jurisdiction, there would be no reason for statutes giving tribal courts exclusive jurisdiction. These statutes also show that Congress has the power and ability to give tribal courts jurisdiction when it chooses to do so. See also Hicks, 533 U.S. at 365 ("The States' inherent jurisdiction on reservations can of course be stripped by Congress.").
 [*P127]  There is a difference between federal policy and federal law. Substantive federal law is generally made by Congress.15  Here there is no applicable law. And the absence of a statute restricting the exercise of our jurisdiction emphasizes the need for us to address the matter head-on.
 [*P128]  Absent a controlling statute or binding precedent from the U.S. Supreme Court, it is incumbent on us to decide how to balance the needed deference to the sovereignty and jurisdiction of the tribal courts. See Drumm v. Brown, 245 Conn. 657, 716 A.2d 50, 63 (Conn. 1998) (concluding that even if the Supreme Court's precedents establish "only a federal court procedural rule," that court may look to similar policies in "adopt[ing] [a] doctrine for the courts of this jurisdiction").16  I would do so here.
 [*P129]  Thus, I would not find that federal precedent or statutes urge us to follow the framework set forth in LaPlante. But I would adopt a rule of exhaustion as a matter of comity under Utah common law—a rule that would call for exhaustion in the face of a pending tribal court proceeding, but not before such a case is actually filed.17 
II
 [*P130]  Even assuming that the LaPlante line of cases applies to state courts, I would not interpret those cases to require exhaustion in the absence of a pending case filed in tribal courts. I agree with the Connecticut Supreme Court's analysis of this issue. See Drumm v. Brown, 245 Conn. 657, 716 A.2d 50, 64 (Conn. 1998) (concluding that "exhaustion is not required" under LaPlante "in the absence of a pending action in the tribal court").
 [*P131]  Again there is no direct holding from the U.S. Supreme Court on this point. "[I]n both cases in which the Supreme Court has held that exhaustion was necessary, namely National Farmers Union Ins. Cos. and Iowa Mutual Ins. Co. [v. LaPlante], a proceeding was already pending in the tribal court." Id.
 [*P132]  The terms and structure of the Supreme Court's opinions strongly suggest "that the court contemplated application of  the requirement only when a parallel proceeding was pending in the tribal court." Id. The National Farmers Union case, for example, "stated that the 'policy of tribal self-government and self-determination . . . favors a rule that will provide the forum whose jurisdiction is being challenged the first opportunity to evaluate the factual and legal bases for the challenge.'" Id. (quoting Nat'l Farmers Union Ins. Cos. v. Crow Tribe of Indians, 471 U.S. 845, 856, 105 S. Ct. 2447, 85 L. Ed. 2d 818 (1985)) (emphasis altered). And "[t]his narrow language presupposes an ongoing proceeding in the tribal court." Id.
 [*P133]  The notion of deference to a "forum whose jurisdiction is being challenged" is reflective of a rule that applies in the face of an existing court proceeding. And one of the exceptions identified in National Farmers Union is along the same lines: The exception says that exhaustion is not "required" where the tribal suit "is patently violative of express jurisdictional prohibitions." 471 U.S. at 856 n.21 (emphasis added); see also Drumm, 716 A.2d at 64 (making this point).
 [*P134]  There is further language in LaPlante that reinforces this view. As the Connecticut Supreme Court noted, LaPlante mandates that "'federal courts should not intervene' in tribal court proceedings." Drumm, 716 A.2d at 64 (quoting Iowa Mut. Ins. Co. v. LaPlante, 480 U.S. 9, 17, 107 S. Ct. 971, 94 L. Ed. 2d 10 (1987)) (emphasis in Drumm)). This "reinforces the impression that the court contemplated application of the rule specifically where tribal court proceedings have commenced." Id. Intervention is not possible without a pending action. And that suggests that the LaPlante rule of exhaustion is implicated in the presence of an actual pending proceeding in tribal court. See also id. (quoting Granberry v. Greer, 481 U.S. 129, 131 n.4, 107 S. Ct. 1671, 95 L. Ed. 2d 119 (1987), for the proposition that the LaPlante principle of exhaustion was triggered by a "parallel tribal court proceeding"); id. at 65 (quoting Strate v. A-1 Contractors, 520 U.S. 438, 448, 117 S. Ct. 1404, 137 L. Ed. 2d 661 (1997), speaking of "an exhaustion rule allowing tribal courts initially to respond to an invocation of their jurisdiction").18 
 [*P135]  Justice Himonas resists this conclusion on the ground that LaPlante announces a "rule of exhaustion, not abstention." Supra ¶ 106. But the dichotomy set up by Justice Himonas is overstated. The principle of abstention is not limited to the notion of "balanc[ing] multiple factors" such as "judicial economy concerns and the avoidance of piecemeal litigation." Supra ¶ 106. Abstention is simply the idea of a court of one sovereign staying its hand in the face of the exercise of jurisdiction by another. See Younger v. Harris, 401 U.S. 37, 43, 91 S. Ct. 746, 27 L. Ed. 2d 669 (1971) (restraining federal courts to allow "state courts to try state cases free from interference by federal courts"). Abstention, just as exhaustion, is based on concerns regarding comity and deference to ongoing judicial proceedings. And courts have no discretion with some forms of abstention, as in Younger abstention, but must dismiss or stay the federal suit. Id. (holding that absent several narrow exceptions, federal courts must abstain from enjoining state court criminal proceedings). Exhaustion and abstention, then, are closely related doctrines, and speaking of this as an exhaustion case rather than an abstention case does not tell us the answer to the question presented.
 [*P136]  LaPlante, in fact, speaks of its "rule" as a form of "abstention." It does so implicitly in its prohibition on intervention in a tribal court action and its mandate for deference to a current "challenge to [the tribal court's] jurisdiction." LaPlante, 480 U.S. at 16 (internal quotation marks omitted). And it even does so explicitly—in stating that the LaPlante "rule is analogous to principles of abstention articulated in Colorado River Water Conservation Dist. v. United States, 424 U.S. 800, 96 S. Ct. 1236, 47 L. Ed. 2d 483 (1976)." Id. at 16 n.8.
 [*P137]  The substance of the LaPlante court's analysis also reinforces this view. Again I agree with the Connecticut Supreme Court's view of the matter. The LaPlante exhaustion rule can easily be understood to be limited to a case in which there is a live, pending proceeding in tribal court. That conclusion, in fact, is reinforced by the specific policy considerations identified in LaPlante and National Farmers Union. See Drumm, 716 A.2d at 65 (concluding that the concerns "upon which the doctrine is based [are] most pressing when a parallel proceeding is pending in the tribal court").
 [*P138]  The first consideration identified in LaPlante is the "federal policy supporting tribal self-government," which "directs a federal court to stay its hand in order to give the tribal court 'a full opportunity to determine its own jurisdiction.'" LaPlante, 480 U.S. at 16 (citation omitted). The National Farmers Union formulation of this policy is similar. There the court spoke of the need to allow the "forum whose jurisdiction is being challenged" to have the "first opportunity to evaluate the factual and legal bases for the challenge." 471 U.S. at 856. As noted above, both of these statements of policy presuppose the pendency of a parallel proceeding in tribal court. Tribal courts are not charged with assessing their own jurisdiction on their own accord—without a case having been filed by the parties. So the directive for a nontribal court to "stay its hand" to "give the tribal court a full opportunity to determine its own jurisdiction" makes no sense unless and until a parallel tribal proceeding is actually filed.
 [*P139]  As the Connecticut Supreme Court put it, "the risk that adjudication by the nontribal forum will impair the tribal court's authority" is implicated "where proceedings arising from the same transactions and occurrences, and involving substantially the same issues and parties, are pending in both a tribal and nontribal court." Drumm, 716 A.2d at 65. But "the impact on a tribal court's authority of a nontribal court's adjudication of a matter over which the tribal court could, but has not, exercised jurisdiction" is unclear. Id. "Any such effect is speculative and indirect, consisting merely of a lost opportunity or a potential unrealized." Id.
 [*P140] National Farmers Union also raised a concern about the "procedural nightmare" that would ensue if an "underlying tort action" is allowed to proceed with a pending tribal proceeding hanging in the balance. 471 U.S. at 853, 856 (discussing the policy of the advancement of the "orderly administration of justice"). The court expressed discomfort with the potential procedural complexities arising where a defendant is allowed to challenge tribal court jurisdiction first in federal court.19 Id. at 856. But again this policy is only clearly implicated in the face of a pending tribal proceeding. There is no "procedural nightmare" without two pending, overlapping cases. Indeed the majority's holding here—its requirement of a separate filing in a tribunal of a separate sovereign—itself interferes with the "orderly administration of justice." The parties to this case are apparently content to have their differences resolved in our Utah courts. The plaintiffs filed the case here  and no defendant saw fit to file a separate (declaratory) proceeding in tribal court. Unless and until that happens, there is no "procedural nightmare" and no interference with the "orderly administration of justice."
 [*P141]  That also holds for the third policy identified in the National Farmers Union—the concern that a rule of exhaustion "will encourage tribal courts to explain to the parties the precise basis for accepting jurisdiction," and "provide other courts with the benefit of their expertise in such matters in the event of further judicial review." Id. at 857. The majority says that "forcing Harvey to litigate in tribal court" will "provide[] clarity to the parties and any reviewing court on how the tribe views its own jurisdiction." Supra ¶ 51 (emphasis added). Perhaps that is true. But National Farmers Union does not speak of "forcing" anyone to file a separate action in tribal court. It is concerned with allowing tribal courts to "explain" their "basis for accepting jurisdiction." 471 U.S. at 857 (emphasis added). And the notion of acceptance of jurisdiction presupposes a suit filed in tribal court at the voluntary instance of the parties.
 [*P142]  The rule adopted by the majority seems to me to get things backwards. By telling parties who were content to resolve their grievance in our courts that they must pursue a parallel action in the courts of a separate sovereign, the court is neither advancing the "orderly administration of justice" nor furthering Indian "self-governance." The Indian defendants named in this suit are also citizens of the State of Utah. See Meyers v. Bd. of Educ. of San Juan Sch. Dist., 905 F. Supp. 1544, 1564 (D. Utah 1995) ("[O]f course, on-reservation Indians are citizens of the state within which they reside."). As such they are entitled to access to our courts to resolve their differences with the plaintiffs. By directing them to file a declaratory suit in tribal court—a suit they have heretofore declined to file—we are not respecting their right of self-governance. We are overriding it.
 [*P143]  This is a separate basis for the holding of the Connecticut Supreme Court in Drumm. There the court emphasized that "'[c]ourts are in the business of ruling on litigants' contentions, and they generally operate under the rule essential to the efficient administration of justice, that where a court is vested with jurisdiction over the subject-matter . . . and . . . obtains jurisdiction of the person, it becomes its . . . duty to' adjudicate the case before it." 716 A.2d at 65 (quoting Ahneman v. Ahneman, 243 Conn. 471, 706 A.2d 960, 966 (1998) (alternations in original)). "[T]his rule is not absolute." Id. "It may be relaxed, however, only 'in an extreme, compelling situation,'" as where "a proceeding arising out of the same transactions and occurrences, and involving substantially the same issues and parties, is pending before a tribal court." Id. (citation omitted). In that instance a rule of exhaustion makes sense, in light of the "likelihood that state court adjudication will interfere with the proper authority of the tribal court over reservation affairs, in conflict with the federal policy supporting tribal self-government and self-determination." Id. "[W]here the tribal court potentially has jurisdiction over a matter," however, "but no proceeding is pending before it, the attenuated effect on the tribal court's authority of a nontribal court's adjudication of the matter is not sufficiently compelling to outweigh the general obligation upon a court to exercise its jurisdiction when it has been properly invoked." Id. at 65-66 (emphasis added).
 [*P144]  I would so hold. I would conclude that there is no binding federal law requiring the parties to this proceeding to file an action in tribal court. And unless and until such an action is filed, I would defer to the parties' choice of the Utah courts as the forum for the resolution of their dispute. See id. at 66 (noting that some of the parties in that case had filed a "tribal court action during the pendency of th[e] appeal," triggering a rule of "exhaustion" as to those parties).
III
 [*P145]  Perhaps in time the U.S. Supreme Court will extend its precedents and impose a requirement of exhaustion in a case like this one. Or maybe Congress will enact a law restricting the jurisdiction of the state courts in cases where the parties could file in tribal  court. But in the absence of any such statute or precedent addressed to the questions of sovereignty and concurrent jurisdiction at issue here, I would not embrace a requirement of exhaustion of tribal remedies in a case in which no one has expressed an interest in seeking such a remedy. We owe it to the parties who invoke our jurisdiction to resolve the dispute that is presented for decision. And I would find that presumption rebutted only in case of a direct conflict between an action filed in our courts and a parallel proceeding pending in tribal court.

 

