
 [*P88]  The Utah Workers Compensation Act provides that "[t]he right to recover compensation" in an administrative proceeding under the statute "is the exclusive remedy against the employer" for "any accident or injury or death, in any way contracted, sustained, aggravated, or incurred by the employee in the course of or because of or arising out of the employee's employment." Utah Code § 34A-2-105(1) (emphasis added). A statutory claim is "in place of any and all other civil liability whatsoever, at common law or otherwise." Id. (emphasis added).
 [*P89]  This exclusive remedy provision is the heart of the Workers Compensation Act. It preserves the essential bargain of workers compensation established almost a century ago in Utah. See Shattuck-Owen v. Snowbird Corp., 2000 UT 94, ¶ 19, 16 P.3d 555 (referring to the "quid pro quo" of the statute). Under this bargain, workers give up their right to sue their employers in tort for workplace injuries. In return, workers are granted the right to statutory remedies that are afforded without regard to proof of fault. See id. (explaining that the statute gives employees a right to "recover for job-related injuries without showing fault" while assuring that "employers are protected from tort suits" (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 [*P90]  Decades ago this court established an exception to this exclusive remedy provision. In Bryan v. Utah International, 533 P.2d 892, 894 (Utah 1975), we found the Act to be subject to an exception for claims based on "an intentional act." (emphasis added). In reaching that conclusion we noted that "personal injury, by accident" is defined by statute to "include injury caused by the willful act" of a fellow worker. Id.; see also Utah Code § 34A-2-102(1)(j)(i) ("'Personal injury by accident arising out of and in the course of employment' includes an injury caused by the willful act of a third person directed against an employee because of the employee's employment."). But we found a distinction between a willful act and an intentional one, asserting that the latter implies "that the act was not only done knowingly, but with the knowledge that it was wrongful to do it." Bryan, 533 P.2d at 894. And we upheld a right to sue in tort for intentional acts, noting the "policy of our law . . . to allow one injured through the intentional act of another[] to seek redress from the one intending harm" and emphasizing the "salutary effect of deterring intentional injury." Id.
 [*P91]  We extended Bryan further in the decision we rendered at an earlier stage of this case, Helf v. Chevron U.S.A., Inc., 2009 UT 11, 203 P.3d 962 (Helf I). In Helf I we held that proof of intent may be established in either of two ways—by proof "that the actor desired the consequences of his actions" or by demonstrating "that the actor believed the consequences were virtually certain to result." Id. at ¶ 43. In so holding, we relied on the term "accident" as it appears in the Act's exclusive remedy provision. We viewed the "'primary objective' of workers' compensation" as the elimination of "'industrial negligence, in all its forms, from  the concept of the law of tort,'" and concluded that while "'[a]ccidents are an inevitable part of industrial production," "intentional torts by employers are not." Id. at ¶ 28 (quoting Bryan, 533 P.2d at 893, and Beauchamp v. Dow Chemical Co., 427 Mich. 1, 398 N.W.2d 882, 889 (Mich. 1986)). And, under a conception of accident encompassing "unintended and unforeseen injurious occurrence[s]," id. ¶ 27 (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 15 (8th ed. 2004)), we deemed the Workers Compensation Act's exclusive remedy provision not to encompass acts that are intentional in the sense of either intending or expecting the injurious consequence, id. ¶ 43.
 [*P92]  I would accept our holdings in Bryan and Helf I under the doctrine of stare decisis. Such decisions may be in tension with the clear terms of the Workers Compensation Act's exclusive remedy provision.1  But our holdings in these cases were square and straightforward. And they undoubtedly have sustained substantial reliance interests on the part of employees and employers. Unless and until our decisions become unworkable, or are overruled by the legislature, they are worthy of respect.
 [*P93]  Respect for these decisions does not require that we extend them further, however. I respectfully dissent because I view the majority's decision as extending Bryan and Helf I in a manner that is incompatible with the clear terms of the Workers Compensation Act and that distorts the law of election of remedies. I further dissent from the court's determination that the district court erred when it excluded deposition testimony offered by Helf, as the court's analysis on this point is inconsistent with the terms of rule 32(c) of the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure.
 [*P94]  I would affirm on the ground that Jenna Helf voluntarily opted for the remedies available to her in workers compensation, in a manner foreclosing her right to sue in intentional tort under Bryan and Helf I. Alternatively, I would affirm on the ground that the deposition testimony proffered by Helf was properly excluded by the district court.
I
 [*P95]  The doctrine of election of remedies is longstanding and well-settled. One branch of the doctrine is a bar on double recovery. But there is more to the doctrine than that. As the majority acknowledges, the doctrine of election of remedies also precludes a plaintiff from advancing "legally or factually inconsistent recoveries for the same wrong." Supra ¶ 70. Under this branch of the doctrine, a plaintiff's election of a remedy is final once a "judgment is fully satisfied." Supra  ¶ 71 (citing Farmers & Merchs. Bank v. Universal C.I.T. Credit Corp., 4 Utah 2d 155, 289 P.2d 1045, 1049 (Utah 1955)). Satisfaction of the judgment, moreover, precludes more than just double recovery; it bars the plaintiff from asserting a new claim that is legally or factually incompatible with the already-satisfied claim. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 896 cmt. a (1979) ("[W]hen the claim has been extinguished, as by judgment, or by satisfaction . . . a person is necessarily precluded from pursuing the other remedy."); Restatement (First) of Restitution § 144 cmt. a (1937) ("[W]here conduct extinguishes the basic claim, as where there has been a recapture of goods or a satisfaction of the claim, . . . a person is necessarily precluded from pursuing the other remedy.").
 [*P96]  This principle is both simple and well-settled. It holds the plaintiff to its initial election once a judgment is final and satisfied by the defendant. And it precludes subsequent litigation on an inconsistent theory of liability—not just because double recovery is prohibited, but because it is unfair to subject the defendant to a subsequent round of litigation on a new, inconsistent theory of liability. See, e.g., F.T.C. v. Leshin, 719 F.3d 1227, 1232 (11th Cir. 2013) (The doctrine of election of remedies . . . . limits a party with the choice of two remedies that are inconsistent with each other from obtaining both remedies or from obtaining first the one remedy and then, at a later date, an alternative one." (internal quotation marks omitted)); Connectu LLC v. Zuckerberg, 522 F.3d 82, 89 (1st Cir. 2008) ("The election of remedies doctrine is grounded on equitable principles."); see also Am. Jur. 2d Election of Remedies § 3. That principle should apply here. Ms. Helf filed a workers compensation claim and was awarded compensation on the basis of an allegation that her injuries resulted from a workplace accident. Under the doctrine of election of remedies, Helf should now be barred from advancing the inconsistent theory that her injuries were the result of an intentional tort. By allowing Helf to treat her injury as caused both by an accident and an intentional tort, we flatly contradict Helf I, which found injuries due to the latter cause could not also be attributed to the former. See Helf I, at ¶¶ 28, 43.
 [*P97]  A stricter variation on this rule has long since been abandoned. Under the liberal pleading standards of the rules of civil procedure, we no longer foreclose plaintiffs from merely asserting inconsistent theories of liability in alternative claims in a single proceeding. See Utah R. Civ. P. 8(e) (allowing pleading in the alternative); Parrish v. Tahtaras, 7 Utah 2d 87, 318 P.2d 642, 645 (Utah 1957) (recognizing that modern pleading rules obviate the election of remedies bar on alternative pleading). But our rules of procedure say nothing of relevance to the assertion of a new theory of liability in a separate suit filed after the entry and satisfaction of a final judgment on an incompatible one. And we have never departed from our longstanding commitment to the preclusion of such new claims.
 [*P98]  Until today. The majority declines to give preclusive effect to the final judgment on Helf's workers compensation claim under a longstanding principle of the doctrine of election of remedies. It does so, moreover, in apparent recognition of the fact that Helf's claim is barred under the law as it now stands—a law it deems "'tricky and technical,'" and subject to adaptation by the court to "produce fair outcomes for litigants." Supra ¶ 85 (quoting 10 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson's Workers' Compensation Law § 115.05 (2014)). Thus, seeing a "cruel dilemma" for workers faced with a choice between a workers compensation claim and an intentional tort claim, the court declines to give "strict application" to the doctrine of election of remedies. Supra ¶ 80. It also recognizes an inequity in its decision, however—in the potential for "double recovery." Supra ¶ 85. So although the court does not foreclose Helf's claim, it establishes a right of her employer to seek reimbursement to the extent of any payment of workers compensation benefits if Helf prevails in her tort claim. Supra ¶ 86.
 [*P99]  I respectfully dissent from this decision. The law of election of remedies may be a "rule of 'procedure or judicial administration.'" Supra ¶ 85. But it is—and has long been—the law of this state. A litigant like Chevron should be entitled to rely on it. The  doctrine of election of remedies assures "fair outcomes" for all litigants, not just plaintiffs. And a core element of this law, from the standpoint of a defendant, is a right of repose—a right to rely on the finality and preclusive effect of a judgment that has been satisfied by the defendant. Dep't of Envtl. Mgmt. v. State, 799 A.2d 274, 277 (R.I. 2002) ("The doctrine of election of remedies is one that is grounded in equity and is designed to mitigate unfairness to both parties . . . ."(emphasis added)); Barbe v. Villeneuve, 505 So. 2d 1331, 1332 (Fla. 1987) ("The election of remedies doctrine is an application of the doctrine of estoppel . . . ."). See also Am. Jur. 2d Election of Remedies § 3 (2014) ("The doctrine of election of remedies, being equitable in nature, is designed to mitigate possible unfairness to both parties" (emphasis added) (footnote omitted)). The court arbitrarily overrides this important policy in preserving "fairness" for plaintiffs like Ms. Helf.
 [*P100]  In so doing, the majority not only distorts the doctrine of election of remedies; it also overrides the clear terms of the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers Compensation Act. That provision, as noted, provides that an administrative action "is the exclusive remedy against the employer" for "any accident or injury or death" sustained "in the course of or because of or arising out of the employee's employment," and is "in place of any and all other civil liability whatsoever, at common law or otherwise." Utah Code § 34A-2-105(1). Our prior decisions have made inroads on the seemingly categorical terms of this provision. I accept those decisions, as noted above, as a matter of stare decisis. But I cannot accept the court's decision to extend the intentional tort exception in a manner doing further violence to the clear terms of the Workers Compensation Act.
 [*P101]  Perhaps an intentional tort can be deemed to fall outside the Act—because, for example, only accidents, and not intentionally tortious acts, "'are an inevitable part of industrial production.'" Helf v. Chevron U.S.A., Inc., 2009 UT 11, ¶ 28, 203 P.3d 962 (quoting Beauchamp v. Dow Chemical Co., 427 Mich. 1, 398 N.W.2d 882, 889 (Mich. 1986)). But the reality is that the line between these two events will often be a fuzzy one. That is particularly true in a case like this one, where the defendant's alleged intent is not in a motive to cause harm but in engaging in conduct "expected" to produce such a result. In a case like this, it should hardly be surprising for a plaintiff to opt to file an administrative claim under the Workers Compensation Act—to take advantage of the "simple, adequate, and speedy" remedy available by statute. Park Utah Consol. Mines Co. v. Indus. Comm'n, 84 Utah 481, 36 P.2d 979, 981 (1934). In advancing that claim, moreover, the employee has necessarily established that she suffered an injury arising out of her employment. And she has secured the full advantage of the remedies available under the Act when her employer satisfied the judgment entered against it.
 [*P102]  I see nothing unfair about holding the employee to the benefit of the bargain she sought in securing the recovery available to her under the Workers Compensation Act. That conclusion follows not only as a matter of the law of election of remedies, but also, quite clearly, from the exclusive remedy provision of the Act. Once the employee has sued and recovered on a claim for an injury arising out of her employment, the legislature has clearly directed that such is the exclusive remedy, replacing any common law claim. We are bound by that directive—even if we see unfairness in the "dilemma" it presents to employees. Supra ¶ 80. The answer to that concern is not to override the terms of the statute; it is to defer to the legislature's policy judgment, while leaving any concerns with it to the process for statutory amendment.
 [*P103]  The dilemma described by the majority, moreover, is overstated. In most cases (this one included), the employee will have access to most of the relevant evidence at the time she decides whether to allege an accident or an intentional tort. The outcome of the plaintiff's preferred claim may not be certain, but the relevant facts likely will be well known. Thus, a plaintiff who chooses to initiate a tort claim cannot be sure that her suit will succeed, but she will likely have the evidence she needs to decide whether to pursue that route instead of a workers compensation  claim. And for that reason the principal effect of the majority's decision is not to assure fairness to litigants but to preserve the plaintiff's right to have it both ways—to secure all of the upsides of the "simple, adequate, and speedy" remedy available under the Workers Compensation Act, Park Utah Consol. Mines Co, 36 P.2d at 981, while still preserving the possibility of a bigger payout in a subsequent tort suit.
 [*P104]  Our concern for fairness ought to spark more than a one-sided interest in expanding an employee's grounds for recovery. It should also lead us to consider the legitimate interests of employers in relying on the finality of a workers compensation judgment that is both final and satisfied by the employer. We can protect those interests without closing the door to an intentional tort suit.
 [*P105]  An employee who believes she is the victim of a workplace act that could alternatively be conceived as either accidental or intentional can make an informed election of her preferred remedy—of a streamlined workers compensation claim (which would hold the promise of defined benefits without regard to fault) or a more drawn out tort claim (with greater upside in terms of damages but the uncertainties inherent in a requirement of proving fault). Such a choice may not always be easy2 ; but I see nothing unfair about holding a plaintiff to the election she made voluntarily. Our law of election of remedies has long held the plaintiff to that choice. It is unfair to the employer to abandon that law in a manner that gives the plaintiff all of the upsides of a workers compensation claim without granting the employer the benefit of the guarantee of the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers Compensation Act.
 [*P106]  A worker who sues and recovers on a workers compensation claim has the benefit of the exclusive remedy assured to her under the Workers Compensation Act. That is the course that Ms. Helf chose in this case, and she should be held to that choice.
 [*P107]  The opposite course—of suing on an intentional tort instead of filing a workers compensation claim—may be economically taxing to a plaintiff. See supra ¶ 80 (raising concerns about a plaintiff's ability to "survive without any benefits" during "potentially protracted litigation"). But that is the whole point of the workers compensation scheme. The statute provides a streamlined mechanism for an award of benefits without regard to proof of fault in order to minimize the hardship to employees who are injured on the job. There is a quid pro quo for that streamlined process, however. In exchange for streamlined benefits the statute cuts off the employee's right to sue in tort.
 [*P108]  I dissent from a decision that preserves the benefit of the workers compensation bargain for employees while depriving employers of their side of the deal. Policy concerns over the fairness of the exclusive remedy provision should be directed to the legislature. We overstep our authority in bending the law of election of remedies in a manner overriding the clear terms of the Workers Compensation Act.3 
 [*P109]   The cases cited by the majority, supra ¶ 83 n.10, are unpersuasive for two reasons. First, the holdings of two of those cases were mandated by state statutes establishing an intentional tort exception to the applicable exclusive remedy provision.4  Second, the remaining cases speak only to the common law question presented—of the fairness of giving effect to the doctrine of election of remedies in a manner cutting off claims of employees,5  or of the policy concern regarding perverse incentives for employers.6  That analysis falls short, as noted above, because it ignores the interest of fairness to employers. But it also fails to account for the clear terms of the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers Compensation Act. It is one thing to say that a workplace injury sustained as a result of an intentional tort is somehow not an "injury . . . in the course of or because of or arising out of the employee's employment." Utah Code § 34A-2-105(1). It is quite another, however, to say that such an injury once characterized as such in a suit brought to fruition (and satisfaction) by an employee can later lose that character in a subsequent suit filed by the same employee.7 
 [*P110]  None of the cases cited by the majority offer a basis for reconciling the decision to abandon the doctrine of election of remedies with the clear terms of the Workers Compensation Act.8  I would give effect to the  statute. And I would leave any policy concerns regarding the effects on plaintiffs to the process for legislative amendment.
II
 [*P111]  Under our rules of civil procedure, "[o]bjections to the competency of a witness or to the competency, relevancy, or materiality of testimony are not waived by failure to make them before or during the taking of the deposition, unless the ground of the objection is one which might have been obviated or removed if presented at that time." Utah R. Civ. P. 32(c)(3)(A). The majority views this rule as overriding the ground identified by the district court for refusing to consider the deposition testimony advanced by Ms. Helf on summary judgment. In the deposition in question, a union representative was asked by counsel for Chevron whether the dayshift supervisor had any "role" in "instructing Ms. Helf to neutralize the pit on the nightshift." The deponent didn't answer that question. Instead he volunteered, based on an "interview" that the union representative had with the dayshift supervisor, that the dayshift supervisor had given a "turnover to the nightshift [supervisor]," in which he told him "what they had tried, what had happened, the alarms went off, people ... got sick," or in other words "just ma[king] him aware . . . that they got so many complaints of the odor, people getting sick and the alarms, that they shut it down."
 [*P112]  Chevron's counsel made no objection to this testimony during the deposition. But in the course of the summary judgment proceedings, Chevron did file a motion to strike it, asserting that it was hearsay and that the union representative lacked personal knowledge. The district court rejected those grounds, but nonetheless excluded the testimony on the grounds that it lacked foundation and was nonresponsive to the question asked. And the court granted Chevron's motion for summary judgment on the ground that Helf had failed to produce admissible evidence that the night supervisor knew that workers had been sickened by the neutralization process during the day shift.
 [*P113]  I would affirm that decision. In so doing I would reject the argument advanced by Ms. Helf—and endorsed today by the majority—deeming the court's grounds for excluding the deposition testimony subject to waiver under rule 32(c) of the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure.
 [*P114]  This rule applies only to objections (as to competency, relevance, or materiality) that could have been "obviated or removed if presented at that time." Id. In context, and in line with longstanding practice and settled caselaw, such objections are those that could be "obviated or removed" by the reformulation of the question by the attorney asking it. See, e.g., 21 Charles Alan Wright & Kenneth W. Graham, Jr., Fedederal Practice & Procedure § 5037.6 (2d ed. 2005); Rosary-Take One Prod. Co. v. New Line Distrib., Inc., no. 89 Civ. 1905(CSH), 1996 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1951, 1996 WL 79328, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 23, 1996). That is the only way an objection along these lines could be "obviated or removed," as there is no judge presiding at the deposition standing ready to rule on an objection that goes to admissibility. Thus, the exception in rule 32(c)  has long been understood to apply only to objections that can be remedied by a reformulation of the question that was posed; for other objections (remediable only by a ruling by the court, for example), the general rule of non-waiver applies. See 8A Charles Allen Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Richard L. Marcus, 8A Federal Practice & Procedure § 2151 (3d ed. 2010).
 [*P115]  This principle is reinforced by at least one of the authorities cited by the majority, Jordan v. Medley, 711 F.2d 211, 228 U.S. App. D.C. 425 (D.C. Cir. 1983). The Jordan case involved a claim for civil assault, and an attempt by the plaintiff to introduce evidence of a prior charge against the defendant for a crime of assault with a dangerous weapon. This matter had come up during a deposition of the defendant, in which the defendant was asked about prior charges against him, and he responded (without any objection), "assault with a dangerous weapon." Id. at 217. At trial, plaintiff sought to foreclose any objection to the admissibility of this evidence under rule 32(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, asserting that defendant had waived his right to object at trial because "if objection to the inquiry concerning criminal charges had been made at the time of the deposition, the inquiry could have been limited to criminal convictions." Id. at 218. Yet the D.C. Circuit rejected that argument. It explained that an objection under these circumstances "would have 'obviated or removed' the objection only by simultaneously eliminating the testimony in question, which is evidently not what the Rule has in mind." Id. If that were the law, the court explained, "all failures to object would produce a waiver, and the Rule's exception would be converted into an invariable rule." Id. Because rule 32(c) "obviously envisions" a circumstance where "a timely objection (e.g., on the ground of failure to lay an adequate foundation) could have enabled the problem to be remedied so that the same testimony could be received in accordance with law," the court rejected the argument for waiver.9  Id. (citation omitted).
 [*P116]  The same conclusion is appropriate here. The problems with the union representative's testimony are not issues that could have been obviated by a reformulation of the question posed by counsel. Instead the issue went to the admissibility of the deponent's testimony—of his hearsay assertions regarding the statements that the day supervisor made to the night supervisor (according to an "interview" the union representative had with the day supervisor). No reformulation of the question could obviate the problems with that testimony. An objection could only have "eliminat[ed] the testimony in question, which is evidently not what [rule 32(c)] has in mind." Id. There is no way a "timely objection . . . could have enabled the problem to be remedied so that the same testimony could be received in accordance with law." Id. So this is not the kind of objection that Chevron was required to raise during the deposition. For that reason the general rule (no objection required) was properly invoked by the district court.
 [*P117]  An "objection" is, by its very nature, an assertion raised by an opponent. See Wright & Miller, 21 Charles Alan Wright & Kenneth W. Graham, Jr., Fedederal Practice & Procedure § 5037.6 (2d ed. 2005) ("[O]ne must object to a nonresponsive answer at the deposition because the proponent could simply ask an appropriate question to make the evidence admissible"). It seems more than a little strange to speak of a party's duty to object to the form of its own question. I would read rule 32(c) in light of this understanding. I would limit it to an opposing party's objection to a question posed to a deponent. See id.; see also McKelvy v. Darnell, 587 So. 2d 980, 984 (Ala. 1991) ("The rule requires that, if a timely objection would enable the questioner to remedy the problem so that the same testimony could be received in accordance with the law, the objection must be made at the time the deposition is taken") (emphasis added); Rosary-Take One Prod., 1996 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1951, 1996 WL 79328, at *2) ("The policy underlying the rule is to give the inquiring  attorney an opportunity to cure the defect . . . ." (emphasis added)).
 [*P118]  The majority's contrary conclusion may find some support in a few outlying cases. See supra ¶ 39 (citing Kirschner v. Broadhead, 671 F.2d 1034 (7th Cir. 1982)). But it is difficult to reconcile with the terms of the rule. An opposition to the admissibility of a deponent's testimony by the party conducting the deposition is not an objection that could be obviated by the reformulation of a question; it is a motion to strike the answer.
 [*P119]  Today's decision will result in no small degree of upheaval in deposition practice in Utah. If a party conducting a deposition has an obligation to preserve a motion to strike testimony it deems inadmissible, depositions are sure to be bogged down in collateral objections (raised on the record but with no judge to rule on them). That practice runs directly contrary to the obvious intent of rule 32. See 21 Wright, supra, § 2156 (noting that the rule is aimed at assuring that depositions "not be unduly lengthened or obstructed by interposing objections").
 [*P120]  The court's new requirement, moreover, will surely catch many parties unawares. It will hardly come naturally for an attorney conducting a deposition to lay the groundwork for rehabilitating testimony that is problematic but inadmissible on its face. But that is what the court today requires in reading rule 32(c) to require preservation of a motion to strike inadmissible evidence.
 [*P121]  I respectfully dissent. I would read rule 32(c) to be limited to objections by an opponent that could be obviated by the reformulation of the deposing party's question. And because the matter here was not such a matter, I would reject the waiver argument raised by Ms. Helf. Absent any argument for waiver, moreover, I would affirm the district court's decision to strike the deposition in question.
 [*P122]  That decision would also lead me to affirm the district court's decision granting Chevron's motion for summary judgment. Without this deposition testimony, there was not a sufficient basis in the record for a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the Chevron night supervisor knew that an injury to Helf was virtually certain to occur. For reasons identified by the district court, I would affirm the decision granting summary judgment to Chevron even absent an election of remedies defense.

 

