
 [*P28]  Diamond Tree is charged with "gross negligence" in committing fire code and other violations that led to the spontaneous combustion of merchandise (mulch) piled on its business property. David Scott Ipsen was a firefighter called to put out the fire. He suffered injuries from smoke inhalation and ultimately retired when he was unable to continue his work. He then filed suit against Diamond Tree in tort, asserting that its acts of "gross negligence" were the cause of his injuries. The district court dismissed this claim, concluding that Diamond Tree owed no duty to Ipsen under the "professional rescuer rule" adopted in Fordham v. Oldroyd, 2007 UT 74, 171 P.3d 411.
 [*P29]  I would affirm. I find the question presented to be controlled by our analysis in Fordham and reinforced by our more recent decision in Nixon v. Clay, 2019 UT 32, 449 P.3d 11. These cases establish that the duty inquiry here is based on the doctrine of primary assumption of risk as informed by the principle of implied consent. As applied here, these doctrines tell us that there is no duty in a case like this one because smoke inhalation from fighting fires—whether set negligently or by a higher level of negligence we might call "gross"17 —is "inherent" in the voluntary acts of a firefighter.
 [*P30]  I respectfully dissent on the grounds that (1) the rationale and standards in Fordham and Nixon foreclose the imposition of a duty; and (2) the majority's attempts to distinguish these cases are unpersuasive.
I
 [*P31]  In Fordham v. Oldroyd, we established the "professional rescuer rule" in Utah, holding that "a person does not owe a duty of care to a professional rescuer for injury that was sustained by the very negligence that occasioned the rescuer's presence and that was within the scope of hazards inherent in the rescuer's duties." 2007 UT 74, ¶ 13, 171 P.3d 411. We rendered that ruling in recognition of the fact that the injury at issue in that case "was within the scope of those risks inherent in the professional rescuer's duties." Id. ¶ 6. Noting that "firefighters and police officers have a relationship with the public that calls on them to confront certain hazards as part of their professional responsibilities," we held that there was no duty in tort that arises in the exercise of those duties. Id. ¶ 7. We found it "naive to believe that fire and police professionals will be called on to draw on their training in meeting only those hazards brought on by prudent acts gone awry." Id. And we accordingly held that professional rescuers are owed no tort duty by those they are duty-bound—and compensated—to protect.
 [*P32]  We rooted this holding in the doctrine of primary assumption of risk.18  Id. ¶¶ 13-15.  Because the officer plaintiff in Fordham was in the course of a "seemingly usual activity for a highway patrol trooper at an accident scene" when he was injured (by an automobile accident caused by a negligent driver), we held that the professional rescuer rule established an exception to the general rule imposing a duty of reasonable care. Id. ¶ 15. And we emphasized that "[t]he nature of the rescuer-rescued relationship is one that contemplates allocation of costs across society generally for injuries sustained by professional rescuers." Id. ¶ 17.
 [*P33]  The Fordham rule was admittedly announced in the context of an allegation of mere negligence. But the terms of and rationale for our holding sweep more broadly—in a manner that covers the gross negligence alleged in this case. A firefighter's "relationship with the public" anticipates that he will be asked to fight fires set by a wide range of acts of carelessness. And there is no room for a conclusion that a fire like the one at issue here—set by careless disregard of the fire code and other regulations in a business that surely desired not to have its merchandise go up in smoke—is somehow outside the "scope of those risks inherent in" firefighting. The fighting of such fires is surely a "seemingly usual activity" for a firefighter.19 
 [*P34]  The line between "mere negligence" and "gross negligence" is a thin one. And a firefighter who arrives on the scene of a fire is not stopping to ask about the level of egregiousness of the negligence that caused the fire. It is therefore "naive to believe" that firefighters "will be called on to draw on their training in meeting only those hazards brought on by" mere negligence. See id. ¶ 7.
 [*P35]  This conclusion is reinforced by our decision in Nixon v. Clay, 2019 UT 32, 449 P.3d 11. In Nixon we applied the doctrine of primary assumption of risk in holding that there is no duty in the context of voluntary interactions occurring as a result of the inherent risks of a sport. We said that this decision "involves a policy determination (based on implied consent) that there is no basis for the imposition of a duty in tort." Id. ¶ 26 n.6. And we cited Fordham for the proposition that "this doctrine is alive and well in our law." Id.
 [*P36]  In reaching this conclusion we declined to establish a "contact sports exception" per se. We rejected the "majority rule," which stated that there is no duty for injuries incurred in a "contact sport" except where the tortfeasor acted "willfully or recklessly." Id. ¶¶ 9-10. Instead we established a "simpler framework" focused purely on the primary  assumption of risk doctrine. Id. ¶ 10. Citing the Restatement (Second) of Torts section 50 comment b, we noted that "[c]ontact . . . is a known and accepted risk of many sports." Id. ¶ 19. And we held that there is no duty arising from contacts that are a result of "voluntary participation in sports." Id. ¶ 21.
 [*P37]  In so concluding we held that the tortfeasor's "state of mind" is "not a necessary element" of the inquiry into the existence of a duty in tort. Id. ¶ 10. We held that "the 'intentional or reckless' conduct standard" was "unnecessary and potentially problematic as applied to some sports." Id. ¶ 22. "In sports like football, rugby, ice hockey, and other high-contact sports," we noted that "contact between players is often simultaneously intentional or reckless and inherent in the game." Id. And we therefore specified that the duty inquiry is not tied to the tortfeasor's state of mind but instead to "inherency." Id. ¶ 25.
 [*P38]  "The inherency inquiry," we explained, "is an outgrowth of our longstanding doctrine of primary assumption of risk." Id. ¶ 26. And that doctrine, in turn, "is rooted in a principle of implied consent"—the notion "that participants implicitly consent to dangers that are inherent in the activity they voluntarily participate in." Id. "For such dangers," we held that "the doctrine of primary assumption of risk provides that there is no duty, and thus no liability, in tort." Id.
 [*P39]  Nixon thus provides that "the dispositive question" is "whether the contact that caused the injury was either an essential or inherent part of participation in a sport voluntarily engaged in by the parties." Id. ¶ 30. "And that inquiry should be rooted in the implied consent basis for the doctrine of primary assumption of risk." Id. "The ultimate question," then, "is whether the contact that caused the injury" was such "that a person engaging in the activity could be said to have impliedly consented to the contact." Id.
 [*P40]  The premises of our Nixon opinion further reinforce the application of the Fordham rule to cases involving allegations of gross negligence. Under Nixon the key inquiry is a matter of inherency under the doctrine of primary assumption of risk. And inherency is a question of implied consent. Nixon establishes that a tortfeasor's state of mind is not the controlling question. Acts that cause injuries can be "simultaneously . . . reckless and inherent in" a voluntary activity. Id. ¶ 22. So the "dispositive question" is "whether the contact that caused the injury was either an essential or inherent part of participation in" a voluntary activity. Id. ¶ 30. That forecloses Ipsen's position.
 [*P41]  That also follows from the "implied consent" rationale in Nixon. Firefighters impliedly consent to the risk of smoke inhalation in the course of their jobs. Smoke inhalation is one of the central risks of firefighting.20  It is surely inherent in the job. And the inherency doesn't disappear when the fire is caused by a heightened level of negligence.
 [*P42]  I would resolve this case on these grounds. I find these conclusions dictated by Fordham and Nixon. And I would thus affirm the district court's decision dismissing Ipsen's tort claim.
II
 [*P43]  The majority disagrees. It establishes an exception to Fordham and imposes a duty for fires set by gross negligence. It says that "[t]he two public policy concerns that drove us to apply the professional rescuer rule to negligence in Fordham are culpability and deterrence." Supra ¶ 13. And it holds that there is a duty to a firefighter in tort where a fire is set by gross negligence because such activity "involve[s] severe levels of culpability"—"far more" than mere negligence—and raises no concerns of deterring people from calling the fire department for help. Supra  ¶¶ 14-15. I agree with the latter point.21  But I don't think the concern for deterrence is the driving consideration. And the line between mere negligence and gross negligence is too thin for me to agree with the court's first point.
 [*P44]  As this court long ago recognized, "accordion words like 'mere negligence' and 'gross negligence' or 'wanton negligence' suggest comparisons only and give no absolute rule for guidance." State v. Lingman, 97 Utah 180, 91 P.2d 457, 466 (Utah 1939). The tenuous nature of the distinction has been recognized by numerous courts and commentators. Prosser commented on the "vague and impracticable" nature of the distinction between "degrees of negligence." W. PAGE KEATON ET AL., PROSSER AND KEATON ON THE LAW OF TORTS § 34, at 210-11 (5th ed. 1984) [hereinafter PROSSER ON TORTS]. In his view, as in mine, "'gross' negligence is merely the same thing as ordinary negligence, 'with the addition,' as Baron Rolfe once put it, 'of a vituperative epithet.'" Id.; see also Stanulonis v. Marzec, 649 F. Supp. 1536, 1543 (D. Conn. 1986) (describing the distinction between mere negligence, gross negligence, and recklessness as "the difference between 'a fool, a damned fool, and a God-damned fool'") (quoting W. PROSSER ET AL., TORTS 207 (6th ed. 1976)).
 [*P45]  The "very real difficulty of drawing satisfactory lines of demarcation" thus "justifies the rejection of the distinctions in most situations." PROSSER ON TORTS § 34, at 211. For these reasons the grossness of a party's negligence will be a matter left to the eye of the factfinder. See Norman v. Utah Hotel Co., 60 Utah 52, 206 P. 556, 560 (Utah 1922) ("[T]he question [of gross negligence] is one of fact for the jury and not one of law for the court."). That problem opens up the real possibility that the exception we establish today will swallow the rule we adopted in Fordham. Most allegations of negligence can be recast as gross negligence. All it takes is the addition of "a vituperative epithet." For that reason I do not agree that the mere difference in degree between the two forms of negligence "matters" here.22  Supra ¶ 14. I see little difference as a matter of culpability.
 [*P46]   Culpability, moreover, is not the controlling consideration in our case law. Fordham and Nixon root the duty inquiry in the doctrine of primary assumption of risk. The question of whether to endorse a duty in tort is surely a question of "policy," as the majority states. Supra ¶ 9. But the policy inquiry under our case law is centered on the question of implied consent. And for reasons explained above we should conclude that smoke inhalation from fighting fires is an inherent part of the job—and one that Ipsen impliedly consented to in entering into this profession.
 [*P47]  The tortfeasor's state of mind is not controlling under Nixon. The majority concedes the general point but opines that the "conclusion is irrelevant to the professional rescuers' rule for two reasons." Supra ¶ 13 n.9. First the court tries to distinguish sports and firefighting in terms of what is "part of the accepted behavior" of these activities. Supra ¶ 13 n.9. It says that sports may involve reckless or even intentional contact that is within the expected course of the game, but "in the professional rescuers' context, any grossly negligent . . . behavior is not a part of the accepted behavior in a well-ordered society." Supra ¶ 13 n.9. Then the court seeks to draw a distinction based on who governs these activities. It asserts that "sports are governed by a separate set of rules than societal activities that may require the presence of professional rescuers," and concludes that, by contrast, courts are "the only institutions with authority" to "protect professional rescuers fromgross negligence," and therefore can properly "evaluate the relevance and weight of one's state of mind" to the duty imposed. Supra ¶ 13 n.9.
 [*P48]  I see no basis for these distinctions. They are circular. And the court's holding is an effective override of our case law.
 [*P49]  The scope of "accepted behavior" in the activities covered by our tort law is precisely the question presented for our decision. We have held that that question turns on whether the conduct giving rise to injury is "inherent" in a voluntary activity. So we can hold that gross negligence that causes smoke inhalation is "not a part of the accepted behavior" tolerated by our tort law in this setting. And we can claim to distinguish that from sports, where reckless and even intentional contact is "accepted." But that is just the net effect of our holding today. It is not a basis for a decision.23 
 [*P50]  The second point is similarly problematic. There is no distinction in who "governs" the two activities for purposes of our decision in this case. Sports are not "governed" by a separate institution when it comes to duty in tort law. They are governed by the courts. And this court decided on the scope of "accepted behavior" in sports in Nixon—in holding that there was no duty in tort arising out of activity that is inherent in voluntary sports. So again there is no distinction to be made. "Courts . . . are the only institutions with authority to" govern the "societal activities that may require the presence of professional rescuers." Supra ¶ 13 n.9. But we are also "institutions with authority to" govern sports—insofar as we are deciding on the kind of sporting activity that gives rise to tort liability.24 
 [*P51]  The majority's attempts to distinguish Fordham and Nixon are accordingly unpersuasive. Faithful application of these decisions can only lead to one conclusion.
 [*P52]  We should apply our precedents and affirm the decision dismissing Ipsen's claims. The majority's contrary conclusion is unfaithful to our decisions in Fordham and Nixon. And the opinion in this case will effectively unravel the holding in Fordham in light of the thin line between negligence and gross negligence.

 

