 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P50]  I agree with the court's analysis of the bail clause claim and thus concur in Part I of the majority opinion. I also agree with the threshold premises of the majority's disposition of the due process claim against the County: the failure to identify a specific Box Elder County official is not fatal to this claim, supra ¶ 30, and the County may be liable for a flagrant violation of the due process clause, supra ¶¶ 31-36. These are straightforward, appropriate grounds for the decision to reverse and remand to the district court. And on remand Mr. Kuchcinski should have an opportunity to develop the record and to present arguments in support of his attempt to establish the County's liability for a due process violation.
 [*P51]  We should end the analysis there, however. The above premises adequately and effectively address the arguments presented to us on this appeal. We need not and should not proceed to provide further guidance to the parties on remand.
 [*P52]  I disagree with and do not concur in paragraphs 37-48 of the court's opinion. In these paragraphs the majority establishes governing standards under the due process clause of the Utah Constitution. It does so without any briefing from the parties on these issues. And it establishes principles of state due process while citing only federal cases under the United States Constitution.
 [*P53]  This is doubly problematic. We have repeatedly declined to resolve questions not addressed by the parties in their briefs.85  And we have long emphasized that our interpretation of the Utah Constitution does not proceed in lockstep with federal precedent  under parallel provisions of the United States Constitution.86  Our recent cases are particularly forceful on this point. We have underscored the importance of historical analysis focusing on the original meaning of the terms of the Utah Constitution,87  and declined to establish new state constitutional rights in the absence of such briefing.88 
 [*P54]  I would follow these principles here. And I would stop short of providing the guidance presented by the court in paragraphs 37-48.89 

 

