
 [*P55]  Today we are asked to decide whether a party is bound at trial by an unequivocal admission of fact made before trial. To a large extent our law has already answered this question. Where the pretrial admission is made in a pleading or in written discovery, Utah law clearly prevents a party from contradicting the admission at trial. This is a central tenet of our rules of procedure, which establish a pretrial process for identifying disputed questions of fact that proceed to trial. If a party makes an admission of fact in a pleading12  or response to a request for admission,13  the admission is binding. It is a "judicial admission" that the party is barred from contradicting at trial—whether through the party's own testimony or other evidence.
 [*P56]  This is settled doctrine deeply embedded in our law of civil procedure. It follows from the central function of a court—to resolve disputes between parties. See In re Gestational Agreement, 2019 UT 40, ¶ 12, 449 P.3d 69 (explaining that a court's power has "traditionally been limited to the adjudication of disputes"); Univ. of Utah v. Indus. Comm'n of Utah, 64 Utah 273, 229 P. 1103, 1104 (Utah 1924) (noting that courts "have no power to decide abstract questions" or to render judgments "in the absence of an actual controversy"). If there is no dispute of fact after the pretrial winnowing process runs its course,14  our law forecloses the need for further proceedings.
 [*P57]  The case before us today entails a small wrinkle on this settled question—whether to extend our established rule to unequivocal admissions made in a different form within the pretrial winnowing process: testimony given in a deposition. I see no reason to depart from our established law on this minor extension. I would treat a party's unequivocal statement in a deposition the same way we treat a party's other unequivocal statements prior to trial. I would treat it as a judicial admission—subject to the party's right to retract, qualify, or explain away the statement in a manner rendering it no longer "unequivocal."
 [*P58]  The court of appeals adeptly identified the principal grounds for this holding: (1) "allowing cases to proceed to trial when the two parties do not disagree about the matter to be tried is a poor use of our limited judicial resources," given that the "main function of the judicial system in our society is to act as a forum for the fair and impartial resolution of bona fide disputes between parties," Luna v. Luna, 2019 UT App 57, ¶ 17, 442 P.3d 1155; and (2)"there is something unjust about allowing a litigant to convene a trial so that a jury can determine if the facts are other than what the litigant swears they are," allowing a party to "make out a better case for himself than he himself has testified to where his case involves facts within his own knowledge," id. ¶ 19 (citation omitted). As the court of appeals further observed, our system generally allows parties to "plead in the alternative." Id. ¶ 20. But once a case goes to trial, "the need for alternative pleading is eliminated." Id. And our established pretrial mechanisms determine the scope of the trial—issues on which the parties agree are off the table.15 
 [*P59]  We could, of course, treat oral deposition testimony differently. We could hold—as some courts have, and the majority does today—that deposition testimony differs from written admissions because it may consist of only "glib, easily misunderstood answers." Scalf v. D.B. Log Homes, Inc., 128 Cal. App. 4th 1510, 27 Cal. Rptr. 3d 826, 833 (Cal. Ct. App. 2005). But that distinction is insufficient. It ignores both a core element of the standard for judicial admissions (that the statement be "unequivocal"), and the escape valve built into that standard (allowing the party to qualify or retract an otherwise unequivocal statement).
 [*P60]  The majority's standard, moreover, will create perverse incentives and compound the cost of discovery. Under the majority's holding, a party who locks an opponent into an unequivocal admission in a deposition will just follow that up with a request for admission. And the written response to that request will function as the bar sought by the defendant in this case (and upheld by both the district court and court of appeals).
 [*P61]  I see no good reason to require the expense and delay of this additional formality. I see no meaningful distinction between an unequivocal admission in a deposition and an unequivocal admission in a pleading or response to a request for admission. I would apply the same standard to both forms of admissions. And I would avoid the problems the majority warns of by both limiting the rule to unequivocal statements and by preserving the escape valve that allows a party to qualify or retract an admission if and when there is a basis for doing so.16 
 [*P62]  This approach adequately deals with the concerns expressed by the majority. I doubt there will be many cases where a plaintiff admits against his interest that a traffic light was green where a "traffic camera" or "twenty-seven nuns" suggest otherwise. Supra ¶ 2. And on the very rare occasion where such developments ensue, surely the plaintiff will be in a position to qualify his previously unequivocal statement—to note that he believed the light was green when he gave his deposition, but realizes now that he must have been mistaken.17 
 [*P63]  In the unlikely event that the plaintiff sticks by his story in the face of the traffic camera or twenty-seven nuns, I suppose my reaction is either bewilderment or mad respect. Such a plaintiff surely is entitled to qualify or retract his prior admission. But if he stands by his unequivocal admission, he is in no position to insist on a trial under our established system of pretrial procedure.
 [*P64]  A deponent's admission is not rendered equivocal by a mere acknowledgement of contrary testimony from another witness. The deponent must actually equivocate—state that contrary evidence undermines his confidence in his memory of the color of the traffic light. And that never happened here. Luis repeatedly and consistently insisted on the accuracy of his assertion that the light was green. He never backed away from that insistence.
 [*P65]  This observation deals with the majority's concerns about "the realities of litigation practice"—the possibility that a deponent may be "'pushed into an admission by the ingenuity or persistence of adverse counsel.'" Supra ¶ 53 (quoting 2 Robert P. Mosteller et al., McCormick On Evidence § 258 (8th ed. 2020)). Luis Luna did not make a random slip in response to the sharp ingenuity of a crafty lawyer. He was asked simple, straightforward questions about the color of the traffic light. And he gave the same clear answer seven times over ((1) when asked "Did you see the color of the traffic light as you were entering the intersection?" answering "We were heading that way. We had the right-of-way"; (2) when asked "Did you see the color of the light as you were entering the intersection?" answering "Yes. It was green"; (3) when asked "You don't know how far back you were from the intersection when you first noticed the color of the light?" answering "I will repeat myself. It was green when we went through it"; (4) when asked "So what I want to know is exactly where was your car in relation to the intersection when you first noticed the color of the light?" answering "Well, we saw it—we were driving, we saw that it was green, and when we passed through the intersection it was already green"; (5) when asked "Was the light always green from the moment that you first saw it until the moment of the impact?" answering "Yes"; (6) when asked "Did the seat belt tighten on impact?" answering "Somewhat . . . . I will repeat again. When we went through, the light was green"; (7) when asked "based on your previous testimony . . . you were absolutely adamant that the light was green as you proceeded through the intersection; is that correct?" answering "Yes").
 [*P66]  It wouldn't take much "comb[ing]" of the deposition transcript, supra ¶ 53 n.11, to find these statements. A simple search for "color" and "green" would identify each of Luis's seven statements. Once those statements are identified, a retraction or correction would be a simple move.
 [*P67]  There is no "mischief" or "game playing," supra ¶ 53, n.11, in a rule requiring this kind of correction as a prerequisite to going to trial on the question of the color of the traffic light. The real mischief, in my view, is in allowing a party to insist on a trial to allow a jury to decide whether "the facts are other than what the litigant swears they are." Luna, 2019 UT App 57, ¶ 19, 442 P.3d 1155.
 [*P68]  The majority's concerns are thus not implicated by the rule I am advocating. Under my approach, if and when a deponent's answer is an imprecision given in response to "high pressure" tactics of counsel, the law would allow the deponent to retract or qualify his admission if those tactics gave rise to a plausible reason for doing so. See supra ¶ 61. But unless and until the deponent does so, he should be held to his unequivocal admission—whether it is given in a deposition, a pleading, or a response to a request for admission.
 [*P69]  Our system is not an abstract "truth-finding" machine. It is a system for resolving disputes. See Univ. of Utah, 229 P. at 1104 (explaining that courts "have no power to decide abstract questions" or to render judgments "in the absence of an actual controversy"). And the first step in resolving a dispute is to determine whether one exists, and if so, to define its scope. This is in large part the function of our pretrial process. The established rules of that process dictate which points are in dispute between the parties and which ones are not.18  Our courts are, in other words, committed to truth-finding only once a dispute has been established and defined for trial. Accord supra ¶ 3 (referring to the "truth-finding function of the trial process") (emphasis added).
 [*P70]  Our trials accordingly proceed on the basis of party admissions and pleadings—whether or not they jibe with a judge's sense of "what actually occurred." See supra ¶ 43 (complaining of the "injustice" of denying a party the right to contradict himself at trial and "let the trier of fact determine what actually occurred"). And this is a core feature—not a bug—of our procedural system. See Utah Stream Access Coal. v. VR Acquisitions, LLC, 2019 UT 7, ¶¶ 36-37, 439 P.3d 593 (noting that a "core component of our adversary system . . . . leave[s] it to the parties" to identify claims to be litigated at trial, and holding that "we have never thought it our business to second-guess those judgments").
 [*P71]  This feature is aimed at least in part at conserving judicial resources—reserving them for points of dispute between parties. See Luna, 2019 UT App 57, ¶¶ 17-18, 442 P.3d 1155. I see no reason to doubt that it will have that effect across the broad run of cases.
 [*P72]  Perhaps there will be occasional disputes "over whether" a given "deposition statement actually qualifies as a judicial admission." Supra ¶ 42. But those disputes are already inherent in our pretrial system. The majority's rule, moreover, will just kick the can down the road on any such disputes—requiring the additional time, expense, and unnecessary formality of a rule 36 request for admission to confirm any admissions made in depositions. And ultimately, there can be no doubt about what really compounds litigation costs. Trial is by far the most costly and time-consuming element of the civil litigation process. See Kerr v. City of Salt Lake, 2013 UT 75, ¶ 57, 322 P.3d 669, (explaining that "economically and practically" trials are "enormously significant," "terribly costly[,] and time-consuming"). It makes no sense to require costly, time-consuming trials on points that the parties agree on just because the process of sussing out those points could entail some form of less-costly "motion practice." Supra ¶ 42.
 [*P73]  I also doubt that such "motion practice" will be very common, extensive, or costly. The main point of concern for the majority goes to the inquiry called for by the court of appeals into "whether 'giving binding effect to the statement would be consonant with the policies underlying the "judicial admission" rule.'" Supra ¶ 42 (quoting Luna, 2019 UT App 57, ¶ 28, 442 P.3d 1155.). But this element is nowhere established in our settled standards for pretrial admissions. And I would reject it on that basis—and because it adds unnecessary subjectivity and uncertainty.
 [*P74]  The court of appeals added this element in anticipation of the possibility that in certain circumstances "holding a party to his testimony" could be "unjust or at odds with the policies underlying the rule" on judicial admissions. Luna, 2019 UT App 57, ¶ 27, 442 P.3d 1155. These are worthwhile concerns. But to my knowledge no other court has endorsed the need for an open-ended, subjective fourth element like the one established below. And I see no need for such an element to account for the court of appeals' concerns. Our law on pretrial admissions already does so, in requiring that an admission be unequivocal, and in allowing the party to qualify or retract it in appropriate circumstances.
 [*P75]  I would apply that standard here. And I would otherwise affirm the court of appeals across the board—in holding that Luis Luna was properly barred from introducing testimony to contradict his unequivocal admission that the light was green, and in affirming the district court's determination that Maria Luna was entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
 [*P76]  Luis's deposition testimony is as unequivocal as it could possibly be. He testified clearly and repeatedly that Maria had a green traffic light as she entered the intersection. Surely Luis knew that this was an admission against interest. Yet he repeated it seven times in the course of his deposition, despite numerous chances to qualify or limit the admission. I credit Luis for his candor. Had there been nuns or a traffic camera, perhaps that would have given him reason to question his view. But neither nuns nor traffic camera evidence emerged, and Luis never wavered or questioned his view. And that should be controlling here, just as it would be if Maria were required to take the further step of asking Luis to confirm his deposition statement in a written response to a request for admission. Perhaps that is exactly what will happen on remand. If so, it will highlight one of several problems with the majority's standard.
 [*P77]  Absent the opportunity to contradict himself at trial, Luis had absolutely no evidence to support his negligence claim. And for that reason, the district court was right to grant Maria's motion for summary judgment. The district court's decision follows clearly from our decision in Salo v. Tyler, 2018 UT 7, 417 P.3d 581. Salo clarified that "our Utah summary judgment standard is in line with the federal standard set forth in Celotex [Corp. v Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986)]." 2018 UT 7, ¶ 28, 417 P.3d 581. Under that standard, the moving party has the burden of establishing "an absence of a genuine issue of material fact and an entitlement to judgment as a matter of law." Id. ¶ 29. "[T]hat showing can be made without affirmative evidence on the moving party's side if the question presented is one on which the nonmoving party bears the burden of persuasion at trial." Id. If a defendant "can show" that the plaintiff "has no evidence of essential elements of his claim[]" then the defendant is "entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id. ¶ 33. This is the case here. Maria established that Luis had no evidence of an essential element of his claim for negligence—proof of breach of a standard of reasonable care—once his judicial admission was credited. And that was sufficient, as the court of appeals concluded. See Luna, 2019 UT App 57, ¶¶ 40-42, 442 P.3d 1155 (noting that Maria had established that "no . . . fact witness could offer any evidence that [Maria] was driving negligently," and thus concluding that Luis was entitled to judgment as a matter of law).
 [*P78]  I would affirm on these grounds. And I would reinforce our established rule that unequivocal pretrial admissions are binding on a party at trial unless the party qualifies or retracts them.

 

