 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P31]  I concur in the judgment and in Part I of the opinion of Justice Parrish. But I disagree with the balance of that opinion. The issues it addresses in Part II are not properly before us, and that portion of the opinion is thus improperly advisory. Accordingly, I would affirm on the ground that the Post-Conviction Remedies Act (PCRA) affords no right to relief to Meza because he is not challenging a "conviction and sentence" in this case, supra ¶ 11, without addressing Meza's entitlement to relief on a petition for an extraordinary writ, supra ¶ 19 & n.6, or a motion under Utah Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b)(6), supra ¶ 23.
 [*P32]  In reaching out to address the merits of a petition and motion that were not filed by Meza or addressed in the briefing on appeal, Justice Parrish proposes to resolve other issues of substantial significance. She would hold, specifically, that (a) "the PCRA's 'sole remedy' provision," Utah Code section 78B-9-102(1), is somehow "inapplicable to him and does not foreclose us from addressing other remedies beyond those provided in the PCRA," supra ¶ 19 n.7; (b) the constitution requires that a "remedy must exist" to give Meza "a mechanism to challenge his alleged constitutional violation" of his right to counsel, supra ¶ 21; and (c) our cases free a petitioner seeking an extraordinary writ of a burden of proof of any of the elements set forth in traditional common-law writs, substituting instead an undefined principle of "flexibility," supra ¶ 20 n.8.
 [*P33]  The lead opinion's analysis of these significant issues strikes me as questionable. Because none of the issues was properly preserved or briefed in this case, moreover, they should not be resolved in this case.
 [*P34]  The petition dismissed by the district court and presented to us on appeal was a PCRA petition, plain and simple. Meza never filed a petition for an extraordinary writ—not in the district court, and not in our court. The district court, moreover, issued a decision dismissing a PCRA claim. It never ruled on a petition for an extraordinary writ because it was never asked to do so. The issue was accordingly not preserved in the district court.1 
 [*P35]   The same goes for the arguments on appeal. In their briefs the parties have argued over the extent of the courts' jurisdiction to entertain Meza's petition under the PCRA. That question has encompassed two subsidiary issues—the proper construction of Utah Code section 78B-9-104(1) (which authorizes the filing of a petition by a "person who has been convicted and sentenced for a criminal offense"), and whether the courts "retain inherent constitutional authority to create common law exceptions" to the limiting terms of the PCRA.
 [*P36]  Meza's briefs nowhere seek to invoke the power of this court to issue an extraordinary writ. At most, he has asked us to "exercise [our] constitutional authority to entertain [his] PCRA petition." (Emphasis added).2  That became even clearer at oral argument. In response to questions from the bench, Meza's counsel conceded that he had not filed a petition for an extraordinary writ and had nowhere set forth the legal or factual basis for issuance of such a writ. As if to underscore the point, counsel explained his reasons for stopping short of filing such a petition—"We didn't do it in this case because the State has consistently said, 'sorry, it doesn't work, you have to do PCRA.'" And the State, in response, noted that it was not "prepared to respond to the extraordinary writ argument, because Mr. Meza did not brief a petition for an extraordinary writ, and he did not ask for that form of relief."3 
 [*P37]  The availability of an extraordinary writ is thus a matter not properly presented for our decision. Instead, we are asked to decide only whether Meza's claim is proper under the terms of the PCRA, and whether we retain the power to establish an exception to the terms of that statute.4  On the first issue, I would follow Justice Parrish's analysis. I would conclude that the PCRA means what it says, and that Meza's PCRA claim failed as a matter of law because he is not a "person who has been convicted and sentenced for a criminal offense." See supra ¶¶ 14-18. On the second issue, I would reject Meza's argument as foreclosed by the plain language of the PCRA and by our precedents.
 [*P38]  By statute, a PCRA claim is "the sole remedy for any person who challenges a conviction or sentence for a criminal offense." Utah Code § 78B-9-102(1) (emphasis added). And such remedy "replaces all prior remedies for review, including extraordinary or common law writs." Id. In light of these clear, straightforward limitations, our cases have repudiated the notion of a judicial prerogative  to create "common law exceptions" to the PCRA. We embraced that prerogative for a time.5  But we have subsequently held that any such authority was overridden by the above-quoted provisions, which were added to the PCRA by amendment in 2008. See Taylor v. State, 2012 UT 5, ¶ 11 n.3, 270 P.3d 471; Carter v. State, 2012 UT 69, ¶ 23, 289 P.3d 542; Peterson v. Kennard, 2008 UT 90, ¶ 16 n.8, 201 P.3d 956. At least since our decision in Taylor, there can be no question that we lack the authority to make "common law exceptions" to the PCRA.
 [*P39]  That is all that we need to say to affirm the decision of the district court in this case. Because Meza has not filed a petition for extraordinary relief, and the parties have not briefed the propriety of such a petition on appeal, we should not opine on the merits of such a petition. For that reason I cannot join Part II of the lead opinion, which goes to some lengths to opine on the merits of a petition that Meza did not file, see supra ¶ 21, to conclude that such a petition should fail due to the availability of a motion under Utah Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b)(6), see supra ¶¶ 23-26, and, in the process, to opine on significant questions of constitutional law (as to a supposed requirement that a "remedy must exist" for any "alleged constitutional violation," supra ¶ 21).
 [*P40]  The lack of adversarial briefing on the issues explored in part II of the lead opinion is troubling. We have no briefing, for example, on the question of whether a "plain, speedy[,] and adequate remedy is available" to Meza through a mechanism other than a petition for extraordinary relief. Utah R. Civ. P. 65B. Nor do we have any briefing on the question of which if any of the common law writs might best fit Meza's case, or whether we may have the authority to extend an established writ to fit the facts and circumstances of this case. See supra ¶ 20 n.9 (rejecting the argument that "Meza is not entitled to extraordinary relief unless he can identify the ancient writ that provided the specific relief he seeks"). And because no one has briefed these questions, we likewise lack any briefing on the availability of the alternative remedy proposed by Justice Parrish—of a motion to set aside a judgment under Utah Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b)(6).
 [*P41]  The notion of a constitutional requirement that a "remedy must exist" for any "alleged constitutional violation," supra ¶ 21, is another matter that was not briefed by the parties. And this is a substantial leap. Justice Parrish's only authority for it is State v. Rees, 2005 UT 69, ¶ 14, 125 P.3d 874, but the quoted language from Rees is by no means a holding that the constitution guarantees a judicial remedy for any violation of its terms. Rees simply speaks of "questions of what tool should be deployed to protect" a right for which "no remedy exists in statute or rule." Id. (emphasis added). And the answer that the Rees opinion provides is not that a "remedy must exist" as a constitutional requirement, but simply that "extraordinary writs embody the procedure traditionally used to protect such a right." Id. That is uncontroversial. But it does not at all support the notion that for every constitutional right there must be a judicial remedy. American law, in fact, has long repudiated that principle.6  I cannot concur in an opinion that sets  aside longstanding precedent on an important question of constitutional law—least of all in a case in which the question is not properly presented.
 [*P42]  Our law has long recognized the authority of the legislature to regulate the availability of and limitations on private claims asserting violations of the constitution. Doctrines of justiciability, political question, procedural bar, and statutes of limitations have long limited the availability of judicial review of constitutional claims. See supra ¶ 11 n.6. Without careful briefing on the matter, we cannot lightly assume that the legislature exceeded its authority in limiting review under the PCRA to challenges to a "conviction or sentence for a criminal offense." Utah Code § 78B-9-102(1).
 [*P43]  Nor can we avoid the question by asserting that this provision is somehow "inapplicable and does not foreclose us from addressing other remedies outside the PCRA." Supra ¶ 19 n.7. The whole point of the sole remedy provision is to prescribe a sole remedy—to "replace[] all prior remedies for review, including extraordinary or common law writs." Utah Code § 78B-9-102(1). Thus, the fact that "Mr. Meza does not challenge a conviction or a sentence," supra ¶ 19 n.6, does not make the provision "inapplicable." It forecloses his right to assert a claim. That was the holding of the district court—and of part I of the lead opinion. We should leave it at that. We should hold that Meza lacks a right to sue under the PCRA, and leave for any future case the questions whether he may seek an extraordinary writ or file a 60(b) motion (and if he so claims, whether he has a constitutional right to any such remedy).
 [*P44]  Our rules of preservation are longstanding and well-settled.7  And there are significant barriers to our resolution of issues that are neither presented by a live controversy nor briefed by the parties on appeal—barriers ranging from the constitutional (of issuing advisory opinions)8  to the pragmatic (of deciding questions without the benefit of adversary briefing).9 
 [*P45]  I can appreciate a sense of sympathy for the plight of Mr. Meza. And I understand  the impulse to preserve an avenue for relief on his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. But our role in this matter is limited. As judges our job is to decide the issues before us under the law as it stands. I would do so without reaching out to resolve questions not properly presented.10 

 

