
 [*P59]  The Utah Workers' Compensation Act prescribes a list of elements necessary to sustain a claim for "permanent total disability" benefits. One of those elements is at issue here. It requires a showing that "an impairment or combination of impairments . . . limit[s]" the claimant's "ability to do basic work activities." Utah Code § 34A-2-413(1)(c)(ii).14 
 [*P60]  We interpreted one clause of this element in our recent decision in Provo City v. Utah Labor Commission, 2015 UT 32, 345 P.3d 1242. In Provo City we interpreted the "basic work activities" clause. In so doing we noted that the permanent total disability standard incorporates "identical language" to that used in "federal social security law." Id. ¶ 28. With that in mind, we construed the Workers' Compensation Act to incorporate an established term of art in disability law. We noted that federal law "defines 'basic work activities' as 'the abilities and aptitudes necessary to do most jobs.'" Id. (quoting 20 C.F.R. § 404.1521(b) (2012)). And we applied that standard in concluding that a workers' compensation claimant's "ability to perform basic work activities" was supported by substantial evidence. Id. ¶¶ 28-29. Provo City noted the claimant's testimony that "certain basic activities, like walking, could cause his condition to worsen such that he could do nothing but rest for two or three days." Id. ¶ 30. And in light of that testimony we upheld the labor commission's determination that the worker's "basic work activities" were "limited." Id.
 [*P61]  This case is the logical successor to Provo City. Here we are asked to interpret the "limit" clause of the same provision at issue in Provo City. We are asked to determine the nature or extent of the "limit" on basic work activities that must be proven to fulfill this element of the Workers' Compensation Act. The majority answers that question by reference to our opinion in Provo City. It says that Provo City supports its determination that the "limit" clause requires proof of a significant "limit" on those activities. Supra ¶ 24. Thus, the majority holds that a worker must show that his impairment "significantly hinder[s]" his "ability to meaningfully participate in the workforce" in order to establish this element of a permanent  total disability under the Workers' Compensation Act. Supra ¶ 24 (emphasis added). Alternatively, the court says that the limitation required by statute must be "'reasonable'—in the sense that the limitation would make it unreasonable for an employer to ask an employee to perform the tasks that are basic prerequisites of successfully working a broad swath of jobs." Supra ¶ 29.
 [*P62]  Applying this standard, the majority affirms the labor commission's determination that Mark Oliver was not "limited" in his ability to do "basic work activities." Supra ¶ 29. It holds, in other words, that Oliver "was not rendered practically incapable of performing the core tasks that are essential to a broad swath of different jobs." Supra ¶ 29. And in so doing the majority reverses the court of appeals' contrary conclusion—its holding that "the Commission's determinations were based on incorrect legal standards and were not supported by the record as a whole." Oliver v. Labor Comm'n, 2015 UT App 225, ¶ 22, 359 P.3d 684.
 [*P63]  I agree with the judgment of the court but disagree with much of the majority's analysis—in particular the interpretive method the court applies in coming to its proposed legal standard. While evoking terms like "plain," "natural," or "intuitive" to justify its interpretation of the statutory term "limit," supra ¶¶ 24, 46, 48, the majority fails to explain how its chosen standard follows from past precedent, the linguistic context of the statute, or other principles of statutory interpretation. And I find no basis in the language of the Workers' Compensation Act—much less in the Provo City opinion—for the standard announced today. Thus, I write separately to set forth the standard that I would adopt and to articulate the grounds that I propose for resolving this case.
 [*P64]  In the paragraphs below I first set forth the basis for my construction of the statute. Then I respond to the grounds articulated by the majority for its approach. And I close by explaining that I would nonetheless affirm the labor commission's decision on a separate, independent ground (its determination that Oliver has not established a permanent total disability because Oliver was capable of performing a job for which he was previously qualified).
I
 [*P65]  I would read "limit" to encompass any restraint or confinement on a worker's ability to perform basic work activities. That standard seems to me to follow from the text of the statute, from a settled canon of construction, and from the term-of-art meaning of "limit" in federal disability law.
A
 [*P66]  The verb limit conveys only the idea of restraint or confinement. See The Random House Dictionary of the English Language 1115 (2d ed. 1987) (defining limit as a verb as "to restrict by or as if by establishing limits" or "to confine or keep within limits" or "to fix or assign definitely or specifically"). It does not by itself convey a particular degree of restriction. See also supra ¶ 24 n.4 (conceding that the notion of a "limit" leaves room for "different degrees of restriction").
 [*P67]  This is telling. It suggests that limit by itself—without an adverb or other modifier—encompasses any degree of restraint or confinement. This is the "plain" meaning of the statutory term. Without more, we have no non-arbitrary basis for selecting a degree of limitation that is not conveyed by the terms of the statute.
 [*P68]  The majority deems its construction "natural" and "intuitive." Supra ¶ 46, 48. But that is just the majority judges' intuition speaking. State v. Rasabout, 2015 UT 72, ¶¶ 53-56, 356 P.3d 1258 (Lee, A.C.J. concurring) (discussing the importance of transparency when using linguistic intuition in deciding among possible meanings of a term). Nothing in the language of the statute says that the only limit that counts is one that "significantly hinder[s]" a worker's "ability to meaningfully participate in the workforce." Supra ¶ 24. We can call this limitation on limit "reasonable," supra ¶ 29, but that doesn't make it consistent with the statute's "plain language." It simply means that we find this particular limit on limit a sensible one.
 [*P69]   I have no quarrel with that conclusion. If we were starting from scratch—selecting a standard that accords with our sense of good policy—then I would be fine with the majority's approach. But that is not the question presented. We are not asked to decide on a degree of limit that we find reasonable. We are asked to interpret the language of the statute. And I find that language—the verb limit without any modifier—to sustain my interpretation and to undermine the majority's.
B
 [*P70]  This conclusion is reinforced by a settled canon of statutory construction: We do not "infer substantive terms into the text that are not already there." Arredondo v. Avis Rent A Car Sys., Inc., 2001 UT 29, ¶ 12, 24 P.3d 928. More specifically, and more to the point here, we do not infer "limiting modifiers . . . into the language of [a] statute." See State v. Holm, 2006 UT 31, ¶ 28, 137 P.3d 726.
 [*P71]  This latter formulation of the canon fits this statutory context perfectly. Limit, as noted, bears no limitation or modifier. And the majority transgresses this canon in inferring a limitation that does not appear on the face of the statute. My approach avoids this problem. It accords with the statutory text as informed by the presumption against inferring "limiting modifiers" not set forth in the language of the statute.
C
 [*P72]  My approach is also consistent with this court's analysis in the Provo City case. In that case we interpreted the basic work activities clause of the permanent total disability statute. In so doing we looked to federal disability law as a sort of "specialized dictionary" informing our interpretation of the parallel language in Utah's permanent total disability statute. A similar approach sustains the interpretation that I would adopt here.
I
 [*P73]  Historically, the "permanent total disability" standard under the Workers' Compensation Act was tied expressly to federal disability law. Prior to amendments made in 1995, the Act stated that "[p]ermanent total disability for purposes of this chapter requires a finding by the commission of total disability, as measured by the substance of the sequential decision-making process of the Social Security Administration under Title 20 of the Code of Federal Regulations as revised." Utah Code § 35-1-67(1)(b) (1994).
 [*P74]  In 1995, the legislature eliminated the express incorporation of the "sequential decision-making process of the Social Security Administration." S.B. 123, 51st Leg., Gen. Sess. (Utah 1995). Thus, the Workers' Compensation Act now prescribes its own standard of "permanent total disability." Yet the Utah standard, while no longer verbatim the federal standard, still borrows substantially from federal law—incorporating numerous elements that are obviously imported from disability standards embedded in social security law.15 
 [*P75]   The provision at issue here is no exception. Under Utah law the worker is required to show that he "has an impairment or combination of impairments that limit the employee's ability to do basic work activities." Utah Code § 34A-2-413(1)(c)(ii). This provision has an obvious counterpart in federal disability law. The parallel element under the Social Security Act requires proof of an impairment that "significantly limit[s]" the worker's "physical or mental ability to do basic work activities." 20 C.F.R. § 404.1522(a).
 [*P76]  We connected the dots between the state and federal provisions in our decision in Provo City. In that case, as noted, we considered the meaning of the "basic work activities clause." And in interpreting that clause our Provo City opinion noted the parallel terms and structure of the state and federal schemes and thus interpreted the Workers' Compensation Act to have incorporated a legal term of art from federal disability law. See Provo City, 2015 UT 32, ¶¶ 28-29, 345 P.3d 1242. Specifically, we gave content to "basic work activities" by incorporating the federal definition of that clause. See id. ¶ 28 (quoting federal disability law in concluding that our workers' compensation standard "defines 'basic work activities' as 'the abilities and aptitudes necessary to do most jobs'").
 [*P77]  I would follow a similar path here. I would interpret the "limit" clause as incorporating a term of art from federal (social security) disability law. And because the federal standard sets a low bar for "limit"—giving literal application to the full scope of this term (encompassing any non-de minimis impairment that may bind, restrain, or confine)16  —I would interpret the Workers' Compensation Act to incorporate the same standard. I would hold that a worker can show that an impairment "limit[s]" her basic work activities if she can show that it has some non-de minimis effect of restraining or confining her from performing those activities.17 
 [*P78]  The above also further undermines the majority's contrary conclusion—its requirement of proof of a "significant" limitation that prevents the worker from "meaningfully" participating in the workforce, or in other words that would make it "unreasonable" for an employer to ask an employee to perform the basic functions of most jobs. Supra ¶¶ 24-29. That standard is a fuzzy one. It seems destined to bring disarray and unpredictability to a field that is designed for efficiency and ease of decision-making. A limitation deemed "significant" by one ALJ may justifiably be treated as insignificant by another. That is troubling, and another reason to disagree with the standard embraced by the court.
II
 [*P79]  The majority identifies three principal grounds for the standard it articulates: (a)  the analysis in our Provo City opinion, (b) requires employees to show more than that their impairment imposeswording differences between the state and federal standards, and (c) canons of construction. I find none of them persuasive.
A
 [*P80]  The majority says that Provo City " 'some limitation' on their ability to do basic work activities." Supra ¶ 24 n.5. But the proffered basis for this requirement is only an inference from the Provo City opinion. And in my view the inference is unfounded.
 [*P81]  The majority is right to say that the claimant in Provo City had alleged an impairment that "limited" his "full range of motion with his head and neck." Provo City, 2015 UT 32, ¶ 29, 345 P.3d 1242. And the court is likewise accurate in its characterization of the Provo City court's conclusion that this evidence was insufficient to show that the claimant's "ability to perform most types of jobs was limited." Id. That conclusion, moreover, was rooted in our determination that this evidence "did not suffice to show that the employee suffered limitations that impacted his ability 'to perform most jobs.'" Supra ¶ 24 n. 5 (quoting Provo City, 2015 UT 32, ¶ 29, 345 P.3d 1242).
 [*P82]  It does not follow, however, that Provo City "requires employees to show more than that their impairment imposes 'some limitation' on their ability to do basic work activities." Supra ¶ 24 n.5. The majority's analysis conflates the "basic work activities" clause with the "limit" clause. Provo City was all about the former. It had nothing to say about the latter.
 [*P83]  The Provo City opinion simply holds that full range of motion in a worker's head and neck is not a matter that goes to "basic work activities." We had no occasion in Provo City to decide how much of a limit on neck flexibility would be enough to satisfy this element of the permanent total disability standard because we concluded that neck flexibility was not a "basic work activity"—in that it was not something necessary to "perform most types of jobs." Provo City, 2015 UT 32, ¶ 29, 345 P.3d 1242.
 [*P84]  This analysis is entirely in keeping with the federal (social security) notion of "limit." Federal law lists examples of "[b]asic work activities," which it defines as "the abilities and aptitudes necessary to do most jobs." 20 C.F.R. § 404.1522(b). Exemplary abilities and aptitudes include "[p]hysical functions such as walking, standing, sitting, lifting, pushing, pulling, reaching, carrying, or handling," cognitive functions like "[u]nderstanding, carrying out, and remembering simple instructions," and practical considerations like "[d]ealing with changes in a routine work setting." Id. In Provo City, we determined that "full range of motion" in a worker's neck is not a "basic work activity." Provo City, 2015 UT 32, ¶ 29, 345 P.3d 1242. And that was the basis of our determination that, with respect to his neck impairments, the claimant in Provo City had failed to show that his "ability to perform most types of jobs was limited." Id. But, again, this analysis provided us no occasion to speak to the question presented here—to the extent or degree of a limitation on a basic work activity necessary to amount to a "limit." We were simply saying that there was no effect on a basic work activity, so no analysis of how much of an effect is needed was necessary.18 
 [*P85]   That conclusion is confirmed by the alternative basis for our decision in Provo City. Provo City, as noted, ultimately affirmed the labor commission's determination that the claimant in that case was "limited" in performing "basic work activities." Id. ¶ 30. And it did so in a manner that is consistent with my approach and unsupportive of the majority's.
 [*P86]  Our decision to affirm the labor commission in Provo City was based on alternative—and quite proper—"basic work activities" that were affected by the claimant's impairment. In affirming the labor commission we noted the claimant's testimony that "certain basic activities, like walking, could cause his condition to worsen such that he could do nothing but rest for two or three days." Id.. And in light of that testimony we upheld the labor commission's determination that the worker's "basic work activities" were "limited." Id. Walking, unlike full range of motion in one's neck, is a matter that goes to a "basic work activity" under the federal standard. See 20 C.F.R. § 404.1522(b) (defining "basic work activity" to include "[p]hysical functions such as walking, standing, sitting, lifting, pushing, pulling, reaching, carrying, or handling"). We said nothing about the extent of the required "limit" on these basic work activities in Provo City. We simply credited the claimant's testimony that "certain basic activities, like walking, could cause his condition to worsen such that he could do nothing but rest for two or three days." Provo City, 2015 UT 32, ¶ 30, 345 P.3d 1242. And we held that that was enough to sustain the labor commission's determination that the worker's "basic work activities" were "limited." Id.
 [*P87]  Provo City thus does not answer the question presented here regarding the extent of the "limit" clause. It speaks only to the "basic work activities" clause. And it does so in a manner undermining rather than supporting the standard adopted by the majority in this case.
B
 [*P88]  The majority concedes that our Provo City opinion invokes federal law as a basis for interpreting the legal terms of art that appear in the permanent total disability standard in the Workers' Compensation Act. Supra ¶ 27 n.6. But the court declines to interpret the Act as incorporating legal terms of art that are transplanted from federal disability law in this case. Instead it says that federal disability standards are simply "persuasive authority that we may consult, when helpful." Id.
 [*P89]  I find that a little puzzling. Of course we are not bound by federal law in interpreting the Utah Workers' Compensation Act. So to that extent I agree that federal law is at most "persuasive," and that we are not obligated to interpret the Utah Workers' Compensation Act in lock-step with federal disability law. But that is not my point. Nor is it the inference that I would draw from Provo City. The Provo City opinion did not invoke federal disability law as "authority" for its decision. It simply acknowledged that the terms of the Workers' Compensation Act are largely drawn from federal disability law. And it said what we have said on numerous occasions—that legal terms transplanted from other areas of law are understood to bring their "soil" with them from those other fields. See, e.g., Nielsen v. State, 2016 UT 52, ¶ 18, 391 P.3d 166; State v. Canton, 2013 UT 44, ¶ 28, 308 P.3d 517; Maxfield v. Gary Herbert, 2012 UT 44, ¶ 31, 284 P.3d 647.
 [*P90]  In that sense the federal definition of "limit" is more than "persuasive authority that we may consult" if we deem it "helpful." It is a basis for interpreting the legal term of art—the "limit" clause—that appears in our statute. The majority overrides the established, term-of-art understanding of "limit" in its opinion. And in my view it identifies no persuasive ground for so doing.
 [*P91]  The court's proffered reason for finding the federal standard "unhelpful" is its identification of a difference in the wording of the two provisions. Specifically, the court notes that the social security standard "requires a finding of a 'significant limit'" on basic work activities, while our Utah workers' compensation standard speaks only of a "limit." Supra ¶ 27 n.6. And in light of that  difference the majority rejects the federal standard and adopts its own preferred standard instead.
 [*P92]  The court's premise is correct. This is an instance in which the wording of our law is not quite identical to the federal source from which it was initially drawn. And I have no quarrel with the general idea that such a difference could be a ground for deciding that our legislature has departed from the usual paradigm of borrowing legal terms of art from federal disability law. The problem, however, is that the wording difference identified by the court cuts directly against the standard that it adopts in its decision. Federal law speaks in terms of a "significant limit" and our statute is phrased in terms of only a "limit." So, if anything, the inference to be drawn is that the Utah Legislature deliberately omitted the term "significant" in order to align its standard more closely with the standard employed in federal cases. Yet the majority allows the difference in wording to cut precisely in the opposite direction. It interprets the elimination of the word "significant" in our state statute as an indication that the legislature meant to require proof of a "significant" limit on basic work activities. See supra ¶ 24 (requiring proof that the limit on work activities be "significant").
 [*P93]  That makes no sense to me. I see nothing in the Workers' Compensation Act that undercuts the premise of our Provo City opinion—which is that our permanent total disability standard incorporates legal terms of art imported from federal disability law.
C
 [*P94]  The majority also seeks to sustain its standard on the basis of canons of construction. It says that its construction of the "limit" clause is supported by the presumption against surplusage and the "'absurd consequences' canon." Supra ¶¶ 25, 27.
 [*P95]  In support of the first point the court cites other elements of the standard for establishing a permanent total disability—inability to perform "essential functions" of work for which the worker has been qualified and inability to perform "other work reasonably available." Supra ¶ 26. The court also notes that "[e]ach of these provisions can be met only if an employee suffers from some limitation on the ability to do some common workplace activity." Supra ¶ 26. And for that reason the court concludes that the "limit" clause must require proof of a "significant" degree of limitation. Otherwise, the court says, "any time an employee established either the 'essential functions' element or the 'other work reasonably available' element, that employee would automatically establish that he or she had a limit on the ability to do basic work activities." Supra ¶ 26. And in the majority's view that would rob the "limit" clause of independent meaning—a view that would run counter to the presumption against surplusage. Supra ¶ 26.
 [*P96]  The majority's "absurd consequences" point is a corollary to this one. Invoking this canon, the court says that "[i]f proof of any limit, no matter how slight, were enough for employees to establish that they are limited in their ability to do basic work activities, then it is conceivable that a person could prove a permanent total disability based on a slight limp, the occasional headache, or some other minimal physical or mental limitation." Supra ¶ 27.
 [*P97]  The consequence imagined by the majority would indeed be absurd. And if the federal disability standard would sustain a right to "permanent total disability" upon mere proof of any slight limit on basic work activities (like walking or carrying out simple instructions), then I would agree that the "limit" required by statute must be a significant or material one. But that is not what the federal standard entails.
 [*P98]  The flaw in the majority's analysis is its failure to credit the role of the "limit" clause in the greater statutory scheme. Proof of a "limit" on basic work activities does not by itself sustain a right to permanent total disability benefits. Several other elements must be established to sustain a showing of a permanent total disability—including the worker's inability to perform "essential functions" of jobs he has been qualified to do and the inability to perform "other work reasonably available." And a worker with only a "slight limp" or an "occasional headache" would be unable to satisfy these elements,  and thus would not qualify for permanent total disability benefits on that basis.
 [*P99]  The federal standard, moreover, does not render the "limit" clause meaningless. In federal law the "limit" clause fulfills a threshold function. It weeds out baseless claims that should proceed no further because the claimant cannot identify any effect on an activity that is "basic" to most jobs.19  Analysis of this question is relatively simple and straightforward because it is limited to review of the medical evidence submitted by the claimant. See, e.g., Higgs v. Bowen, 880 F.2d 860, 862-64 (6th Cir. 1988) (per curiam). And where the claimant fails to meet this threshold showing it provides a basis for rejecting the claim without the "waste[d] effort and expense" of assessing the claimant's "vocational profile." Id. at 864.20 
 [*P100]  The Utah scheme does not expressly require the "sequential" analysis of permanent total disability prescribed by federal law. See 20 C.F.R. § 404.1520(a)(4) ("The sequential evaluation process is a series of five 'steps' that we follow in a set order."). Our statute simply lists the various elements of permanent total disability, without requiring that they be analyzed in any particular order. See Utah Code § 34A-2-413(1)(c). But the "limit" clause can still fulfill the function that it performs in federal law—of weeding out meritless claims at a threshold level. And the prospect of that application preserves independent meaning for the "limit" clause, and thus defeats the majority's reliance on the presumption against surplusage.
D
 [*P101]  For the above reasons, the majority's standard finds no support in precedent, in statutory text, or in canons of construction. That should take us back to the plain language of the statute—to the requirement of proof that an impairment "limit[s]" a claimant's "ability to do basic work activities." Utah Code § 34A-2-413(1)(c)(ii). And in my view we should read the reference to "limit" as an incorporation of the federal (social security) standard for this term—a standard that gives literal application to the full scope of this term, encompassing any degree to which an impairment may bind, restrain, or confine a worker's "basic work activities."
 [*P102]  The majority adds a range of modifiers that do not appear on the face of the statute. Instead of crediting any "limit," the court says that only "significant" limits should count. Supra ¶ 24. Elsewhere the court frames the standard a bit differently. It says that a claimant must show that the "limit" on basic work activities is one that "significantly hinder[s]" his "ability to meaningfully participate in the workforce" in order to establish this element of a permanent total disability under the Workers' Compensation Act. Supra ¶ 24. Alternatively, the court says that the limitation required by statute must be "'reasonable'—in the sense that the limitation would make it unreasonable for an employer to ask an employee to perform the tasks that are basic prerequisites of successfully working a broad swath of jobs." Supra ¶ 29.
 [*P103]  I am unsure what these standards will mean in practice. At this stage I do not think we are in any position to say that our approach is "in keeping with the Labor Commission's long-standing test" on this element.21  Supra ¶¶ 28, 45. The majority quotes  only a pre-Provo City case that invokes the "basic work activities" standard, not the limit clause. See supra ¶ 28, (quoting Anderson v. Dee Warner Constr., 2007 UT Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 41, at *9). With respect to the term "limit," the commission in Anderson determined that "this provision only requires that all Mr. Anderson's impairments 'limit' his ability to do basic work activities—the provision does not require that the impairments totally preclude or prevent such work activities." Anderson, 2007 UT Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 41, at *9. Unlike the present case, the commission in Anderson did not apply the "reasonable limit" standard adopted by the majority. Ultimately, moreover, we owe no deference to the labor commission's interpretation of the governing statute. See Ellis-Hall Consultants v. Pub. Serv. Comm'n, 2016 UT 34, ¶ 27, 379 P.3d 1270. So I think we would do better to simply articulate our understanding of the applicable test, and leave to future disputes the question of whether and to what extent we are embracing the labor commission's past practices.
III
 [*P104]  For the above reasons I would apply the federal formulation of a "limit" on basic work activities. And I would conclude that the labor commission applied an erroneous legal standard in determining that Oliver had failed to establish that he suffered an impairment that limited his ability to perform basic work activities. Yet I would nonetheless affirm the labor commission's determination that Oliver failed to establish a permanent total disability. I would do so under the "essential functions" element of the statutory standard. I find the majority's analysis of this issue persuasive. And I would affirm the labor commission on the ground that Oliver failed to establish that he was unable to perform the "essential functions" of a job for which he was qualified at the time of his accident (that of a delivery truck driver). See supra ¶¶ 54-57.

 

