
 [*P75]  Wal-Mart Stores has adopted a policy of non-resistance for employees confronted with workplace violence. The policy directs Wal-Mart associates to "disengage" and "withdraw" when confronted with a weapon. It also reserves their right to "defend themselves or others"—but only "to the extent necessary" to disengage.
 [*P76]  Wal-Mart's policy follows recommendations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. See supra ¶ 48. Those organizations, and doubtless many others, recommend that workers receive training in "how to respond to a robbery" by "turning over money or valuables without resistance."138  The Wal-Mart approach—of disengagement and withdrawal—appears to be a fairly standard practice in retail establishments throughout the country.139 
 [*P77]  Where, as here, the workers in question are at-will employees, the Wal-Mart policy includes a further (implied) element: The employer has the final say in the event of disagreement as to whether the employee was engaged in proper self-defense or prohibited escalation, and a concomitant right to terminate the employee if it decides that the policy was violated.
 [*P78]  The question presented concerns the enforceability of the foregoing arrangement. That question, in my view, is not simply whether Utah law favors a right of self-defense. It is whether an employment agreement along the lines outlined above—with a worker's duty to withdraw when confronted with a weapon, a right of self-defense  when withdrawal is not reasonably possible, and the employer retaining the final say on whether the policy was followed—is a matter where our state "public interest is so strong and the policy so clear and weighty that we should place the policy beyond the reach" of a voluntary contract. Touchard v. La-Z-Boy Inc., 2006 UT 71, ¶ 13, 148 P.3d 945 (emphasis added) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 [*P79]  I would uphold the viability of Wal-Mart's policy under that standard. Thus, I would conclude that Utah's public interest in preserving a right of self-defense is insufficient to override Wal-Mart's legitimate interests in holding its workers to the policy at issue.
 [*P80]  The majority frames the question differently. It asks whether our public policy sustains a right to maintain a wrongful termination claim where "the employee faced an imminent threat of serious bodily harm in circumstances where he or she was unable to safely withdraw." Supra ¶ 73. And it roots that formulation in the fact that the federal district court "assume[d] that the Employees were unable to safely disengage" from the confrontations they faced. Supra ¶ 7.
 [*P81]  That assumption, however, is not an element of the question certified for our review. It is an outgrowth of the summary judgment posture of the case as it currently stands. The certified question presented is whether the "right of self-defense" sustains a "public policy exception to the at-will employment doctrine that provides a basis for a wrongful discharge action" in this case. In analyzing that question, we cannot properly assume that the employees in question "reasonably believe[d] that force [was] necessary to defend against an imminent threat of serious bodily harm and . . . ha[d] no opportunity to withdraw." Supra ¶ 2. Our role in answering certified questions is "not to issue abstract, advisory opinions on general matters of interest to the federal courts." Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v. Horne, 2012 UT 66, ¶ 8, 289 P.3d 502. "It is to resolve disputed questions of state law in a context and manner useful to the resolution of a pending federal case." Id. To do so, we have not only a right but a responsibility to frame the question presented in a manner "facilitating the disposition of the underlying federal case." Id. ¶ 9.
 [*P82]  At this stage of the case, we do not know whether the employee-plaintiffs responded reasonably to an imminent threat or overreacted in the face of a meaningful path for retreat. I would not resolve that doubt by reference to the summary judgment posture of the case (which yields the benefit of the doubt to the nonmoving parties). That move ends up loading the dice in favor of what I see as the less likely scenario in this and in the broad run of cases. Instead, I would take a step back and frame the question presented in more general terms—of whether an express agreement to give the employer the final say in the event of factual disagreement is a matter where our state public policy is so clear and weighty that we should place the matter beyond the reach of a voluntary contract.140 
 [*P83]   While the federal district court assumed that the employees faced an imminent threat and had no opportunity to withdraw in light of the summary judgment posture of the case, the reality is that we do not know exactly what happened in the confrontations that led to the wrongful termination claims against Wal-Mart. And at a minimum, the record on summary judgment supports the conclusion that Wal-Mart made a reasonable judgment in concluding that its employees fought back when they reasonably could have disengaged.141  For me that is easily enough to defeat the public policy basis for a claim for wrongful termination in this case.142 
 [*P84]  I recognize that these are matters in dispute. And I concede that under our criminal law of self-defense, the employee-plaintiffs were fully justified in their response to the violence they faced in the workplace. But that is not the issue before us.143  The  question, rather, is whether our public policy of self-defense is sufficient to override the right of an employer and employee to agree to give the employer the final say in case of doubt about the reasonableness of an employee's act of self-defense in the workplace. That is the arrangement Wal-Mart entered into with its associates—under Policy AP-09, when read against the presumption of at-will employment. And that arrangement seems perfectly reasonable to me, particularly given the high stakes—and substantial risk—inherent in the contrary approach.
 [*P85]  In resolving the matter the other way, the majority jeopardizes the ability of employers to adopt and enforce workplace violence policies like the one adopted by Wal-Mart (and countless other retailers). By ruling that employees have a right to assert wrongful termination claims in cases where they disagree with their employer's assessment of the reasonableness of a response to workplace violence, the majority assures that a substantial percentage of doubtful cases will be resolved in favor of the employee. That will be the inevitable effect of the employee's right to sue. Wrongful termination suits are costly, and the threat of such a suit accordingly gives the employee substantial leverage. That leverage will make it harder for Utah employers to get their employees to follow their workplace violence policies on a day-to-day basis.144  And the Utah workplace will inevitably be less safe as a result.145  I dissent from the court's conclusion that the public policy of the State of Utah requires this troubling result.
 [*P86]  Today's decision jeopardizes employee safety in Utah. And it opens the door to a free-wheeling, case-by-case public policy exception that threatens to swallow the rule of at-will employment.
 [*P87]  I respectfully dissent on three grounds. First, I find no support for the right of self-defense as formulated by the majority in the constitutional, statutory, and common law sources it cites. Second, I cannot conclude that the manner of an individual's exercise of the right of self-defense is a matter of "overarching importance to the public as opposed to the parties only." Touchard, 2006 UT 71, ¶ 17, 148 P.3d 945  (internal quotation marks omitted). Finally, I do not believe that the public interest in the manner of an individual's exercise of the right of self-defense outweighs the interests of Wal-Mart in "regulat[ing] the workplace environment to promote . . . security." Hansen v. America Online, Inc., 2004 UT 62, ¶ 11, 96 P.3d 950.
 I
 [*P88]  For many decades our common law has embraced the presumption that employment in Utah is "at will," meaning that it may be terminated by either party for any reason or for no reason.146  This is no arbitrary presumption. It is the expression of a longstanding state policy—that our economy in general, and labor markets in particular, will be enhanced by a system of employment that is flexible and generally unencumbered by litigation.147 
 [*P89]  Any individual faced with an unforeseen job loss will inevitably bristle at the imposition of the at-will presumption. But our law has long embraced the principle that overall, and across the broad run of employment disputes, we will be better off with a system that eschews drawn-out disputes in favor of a policy of letting bygones be bygones.148 
 [*P90]  The presumption is rebuttable. But our law has placed strict limits on the means of rebuttal. Where the basis for rebuttal is in a violation of public policy, we have required that the policy be "clear and substantial," Hansen v. America Online, Inc., 2004 UT 62, ¶ 7, 96 P.3d 950, or in other words "so clear and weighty that we should place the policy beyond the reach" of voluntary agreement. Touchard v. La-Z-Boy Inc., 2006 UT 71 ¶13, 148 P.3d 945 (internal quotation marks omitted). The applicable public policy, moreover, must be in positive statements of law. Id. ¶ 12 ("A public policy is "clear' only if plainly defined by legislative enactments, constitutional standards, or judicial decisions." (internal quotation marks omitted)). And it must affect a matter of "overarching importance to the public as opposed to the parties only," and clearly "outweigh" the employer's interest in regulating the workplace. Id. ¶¶ 10, 13 (internal quotation marks omitted). In my view the employee-plaintiffs' claims fail at every turn under this framework.
A
 [*P91]  The majority concludes that Utah law upholds a "clear and substantial public policy favoring the right of self-defense." Supra ¶ 38. Yet the right that it ultimately endorses is not the right enshrined in our law. It is a new one, tailored to the employment context. Specifically, in place of the "stand-your-ground" right protected by statute and longstanding caselaw, the court announces a more narrow right—a right to fight back only if you are "unable to withdraw from an  imminent threat of death or serious bodily harm." Supra ¶ 57.
 [*P92]  I dissent from the court's analysis because none of its cited authorities establish this right of self-defense. The court's common law authority, supra ¶ 34, is precisely in line with the governing statute. The cases recognize a broad stand-your-ground right of self-defense, see State v. Turner, 95 Utah 129, 79 P.2d 46, 54 (Utah 1938), with a duty to retreat only as to trespassers and initial aggressors. See People v. Hite, 8 Utah 461, 33 P. 254, 257 (Utah Terr. 1893).
 [*P93]  The court's constitutional authority also falls short. Our constitution is undoubtedly ""fundamental'" in many senses. See supra ¶ 21 (quoting Hansen v. Am. Online, Inc., 2004 UT 62, ¶ 12, 96 P.3d 950). But I cannot agree that the limitations of the constitution are our ""most fundamental'" expressions of the public policies we deem sufficient to override an employer's interest in regulating the workplace. The constitution does not speak to rights in the workplace. It preserves fundamental rights of citizenship from incursion by the government.
 [*P94]  Courts in other jurisdictions have properly observed that provisions of federal and state constitutions are "a problematic source of public policy to support a claim of wrongful discharge, because most [such] provisions protect only against abuses of government power." 2 Mark A. Rothstein Et Al., Employment Law § 9:9, at 628 (5th ed. 2014) (also noting that "attempts to assert against private sector employers federal and state constitutional provisions that require government action generally fail").
 [*P95]  To date, this court has not embraced this principle. But I think we should. If public policy exceptions rooted in the exercise of a legal right are limited to rights connected to employment, infra ¶ 111, we cannot reflexively extend constitutional limitations on governmental power to private employers. We should be skeptical of this extension. Private employers, for example, may understandably wish to limit their employees' speech on matters undermining the interests of the employer. That strikes me as perfectly reasonable. And an employee who speaks out against an employer should have no public policy basis for a wrongful termination suit—regardless of the fact that the right of free speech is undoubtedly "fundamental" when it is infringed by the government. See, e.g., Barr v. Kelso-Burnett Co., 106 Ill. 2d 520, 478 N.E.2d 1354, 1356-57, 88 Ill. Dec. 628 (Ill. 1985) (private employers not bound under public policy exception to follow Free Speech Clauses of federal and state constitution); Prysak v. R.L. Polk Co., 193 Mich. App. 1, 483 N.W.2d 629, 634 (Mich. Ct. App. 1992) (same).149 
 [*P96]  Even assuming that the constitutional provisions cited by the court are expressions of public policy in the context of employment, moreover, the majority still has failed to establish a constitutional basis for the public policy it announces. The cited provisions speak at too high a level of generality to establish a policy favoring the exercise of the right of self-defense in the precise manner identified by the court.
 [*P97]  Article I, section 1 recognizes the "inherent and inalienable right" of Utahns "to enjoy and defend their lives and liberties." Without more, I have no idea what that right entails. The vague,150  aspirational  nature of the text—encompassing the "right" to "enjoy" our "lives"—suggests that this provision was simply the bare bones to which the legislature would later add flesh. And the history of this provision confirms that conclusion. The debates in the convention suggest that this provision was not understood as self-executing.151 
 [*P98]  Article I, section 6 also falls short of sustaining the right embraced by the majority. This provision does not protect a freestanding right of self-defense. It establishes "[t]he individual right of the people to keep and bear arms." Utah Const. art. I, § 6. The reference to "defense of self" is a modifier—one in a series of purposes for which an individual has a right to bear arms. In context, the terms of this provision are not susceptible to a reading that guarantees a freestanding right to "defense of self." If we adopt such a reading, we are implicitly adopting a construction that guarantees a freestanding right to "security" and to "other lawful purposes," as those terms are precisely parallel with the reference to "defense of self." Each of those terms—"for security," for "defense of self," and "for other lawful purposes"—has a parallel position in the linguistic structure of article I, section 6. These are not independently protected rights. They are purposes for which the right to bear arms may attach. And because the right to bear arms is not at issue in this case (and in fact has previously been rejected as a basis for a public policy exception to the presumption of at-will employment, see Hansen, 2004 UT 62, ¶ 20, 96 P.3d 950), article I, section 6 yields no support for the plaintiffs' claims.
 [*P99]  I can agree with the general proposition that the "Utah Constitution supports the notion that Utah law reflects a state public policy in favor of self-defense." Supra ¶ 24 (emphasis added). But that statement of state policy is far too general to be helpful. It begs all of the important questions about the nature and scope of the right of self-defense protected by our law, and against whom it is recognized.
 [*P100]  The court ultimately answers those questions. Later in its opinion the majority asserts that our stand-your-ground statute, Utah Code section 76-2-402, "is not the constitutional minimum." Supra ¶ 31. It appears to conclude, moreover, that the constitutional right of self-defense is one that "embodies a duty to retreat in some circumstances," including in the context of employment.152  Supra ¶ 32.
 [*P101]  That may be a defensible line to draw in the employment context. But it is not the line drawn by our law as it currently stands. The duty to withdraw attaches by law only to a trespasser or an initial aggressor.153  The employee-plaintiffs are neither.  See supra ¶ 33 (acknowledging that "employees defending themselves in the workplace are [not] on the same footing as a trespasser or someone engaged in mutual combat"). So the right we establish today is not one recognized in the "authoritative sources" required by our cases—in existing statements of positive law.154  See Touchard, 2006 UT 71, ¶ 12, 148 P.3d 945 ("A public policy is "clear' only if plainly defined by legislative enactments, constitutional standards, or judicial decisions." (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 [*P102]  The lack of established legal support for the line drawn by the majority should be fatal to the employee-plaintiffs' claims. Our law has long emphasized the need to maintain careful limitations on the sources we look to for the public policies that may override the presumption of at-will employment. We have consistently held that such policies must be "plainly defined"155  by authoritative sources of positive law. That restriction is a core element of our doctrine in this field,156  for at least three reasons.
 [*P103]  First, by limiting wrongful termination claims to cases implicating public policies plainly enshrined in existing law, we "avoid unreasonably eliminating employer discretion in discharging employees." Ryan v. Dan's Food Stores, Inc., 972 P.2d 395, 405 (Utah 1998). This is important. For reasons noted above, the at-will presumption is aimed at preserving active, agile markets for labor. A broad, undisciplined use of the public policy exception will undermine that goal while also interfering with longstanding prerogatives of Utah employers.157 
 [*P104]  Second, a limited conception of the public policy exception also protects important reliance interests in the employment relationship and provides adequate notice of impending tort liability. An employer can, at least arguably, reasonably anticipate the imposition of tort liability for wrongful termination in cases implicating existing, entrenched legal policies. If we extend the public policy exception to newly formulated policies, however, we jeopardize the employer's reasonable expectations—in a manner yielding a troubling extension of tort law. Cf. B.R. ex rel. Jeffs v. West, 2012 UT 11 ¶¶ 25-28, 275 P.3d 228 (discussing the importance of foreseeability in both the duty and proximate cause aspects of a negligence claim). No employer can reasonably anticipate the courts' formulation of new public policies as a basis for tort liability. And the imposition of wrongful termination liability is troubling in this context.
 [*P105]  This concern is highlighted by our decision clarifying that wrongful termination claims sound in tort (and include the possibility of punitive damages). See Peterson v.  Browning, 832 P.2d 1280, 1284 (Utah 1992).158  The potential for such exposure highlights the need for careful, predictable exceptions to the at-will presumption. See id. at 1285 (Howe, A.C.J., concurring) (highlighting the need for the public policy exception "to be applied narrowly and only when there exists a violation of a clear and substantial public policy," and emphasizing that our limitations on the exception assure that it should not be a matter "of concern to employers who are guided by honesty in their employment relations"). Properly restricted, "[t]he public policy exception is narrow enough in its scope and application to be no threat to employers who operate within the mandates of the law and clearly established public policy as set out in the duly adopted laws." Id. at 1285-86 (emphasis added) (quoting Boyle v. Vista Eyewear, Inc., 700 S.W.2d 859, 878 (Mo. Ct. App. 1985)). A tort claim under this exception, moreover, is aimed at deterring activity "that contravenes clear and substantial public policies." Id. at 1285 (lead opinion of Durham, J.). But these premises will not hold for newly announced public policies divorced from positive statements of law.
 [*P106]  Employers may reasonably anticipate the courts' announcement of public policies set forth in "duly adopted laws." And they may accordingly be properly deterred from terminating employees on the basis of such policies. But they cannot reasonably do so for newly adopted—and judicially adapted—state policies. In extending our law to encompass such a policy, the majority ignores an important limitation of our law in this field. In so doing, moreover, it opens up new vistas of exposure for Utah employers.159 
 [*P107]   Finally, and perhaps most importantly, a closed universe of state public policy is essential to the continuing viability of our longstanding doctrine of at-will employment. It is one thing to impose liability for termination in violation of existing public policy. Where we do so we can properly say we are not altering the presumption of at-will employment, but only recognizing a narrow exception to it. We do great violence to the presumption, however, and in fact we effectively repudiate it, where we recognize a right of wrongful termination in a case implicating a new public policy of our own formulation. In that instance, we are not recognizing an exception to the at-will presumption. We are developing a common law doctrine of wrongful termination, in which our courts will decide, on a case-by-case basis, whether the employer's interests are sufficient to override the employee's, and thus to justify termination of employment.
 [*P108]  This is a troubling development in our law. And a much bigger one than the court's opinion acknowledges. I would follow the terms of our caselaw as it currently stands. And in so doing I would hold that the narrow right of self-defense recognized today is not a basis for a wrongful termination claim because it is nowhere enshrined in any authoritative statement of law.160 
B
 [*P109]  The majority also concludes that our Utah policy of self-defense is a matter ""of overarching importance to the public as opposed to the parties only.'" Supra ¶ 39 (quoting Retherford v. AT&T Commc'ns, 844 P.2d 949, 966 n.9 (Utah 1992)). Again I see the matter differently. In my view the right to self-defense is primarily a private matter-a defense from criminal liability, as a privilege to engage in aggressive activity that would otherwise be criminal.
 [*P110]  The court's analysis on this point suffers, at the outset, from the problem noted above. Instead of looking for a matter of overarching public importance in the exercise of the right of self-defense under our law as currently stated, it reframes the analysis. It looks for such an interest in that right when exercised in the limited manner defined in the majority opinion. Even then, moreover, the court does not assert that the exercise of the right of self-defense is a matter necessarily benefitting the public. It simply notes that the right of self-defense includes the right to defend third parties, and thus that its exercise may "protect[] individuals from serious injuries and deter[] the completion of crimes." Supra ¶ 40.
 [*P111]  That is insufficient. The mere possibility of protecting the public falls far short of the standard the law sets for overriding the employer's substantial interest in regulating the terms and conditions of employment. Where the basis for an exception is the exercise of a legal right or privilege, the right in question must redound unquestionably to the public good.161  Generally such  an exception should be limited to the exercise of those rights that relate to a worker's status as an employee.162  See Rothstein, supra § 9:11 (explaining that "employees must enjoy the right because of their status as employees, and not because of some other status they may have, such as citizen or taxpayer"). With respect to those rights, the employer has no legitimate ground for intervening. And for that reason it can be said that the public interest is "so clear and weighty that we can place the policy beyond the reach of contract." See Ryan v. Dan's Food Stores, Inc., 972 P.2d 395, 405 (Utah 1998); Hansen, 2004 UT 62, ¶ 10, 96 P.3d 950 (noting that the principal public policy grounds for rebutting the presumption of at-will employment are matters on which the employer has "no legitimate economic objective").163 
 [*P112]  The right of self-defense falls short under these standards. Such right is not related to the worker's status as an employee.164  And the exercise of this right, as defined by our criminal law, is not a matter conceived as an unmitigated good, or on which the employer has no legitimate interest.165  Instead, our law of self-defense is  rooted in a policy recognizing the difficulty of split-second judgments on matters of life or death. Under that policy, we give the benefit of the doubt to the person who reasonably uses force to defend himself, with a privilege from criminal liability even in circumstances where less force (or even withdrawal) might ultimately have been preferable.166  But the point of the policy is not that every split-second use of defensive force is in the public interest; it is that criminal liability is too big a penalty to impose on a mere error in judgment in the heat of a violent confrontation.167 
 [*P113]  I agree, of course, that our law has long protected an individual who exercises such discretion from the imposition of criminal liability. But the mere existence of a legal privilege from criminal liability tells us little about our public interest in the manner in which the right of self-defense is exercised. I find nothing in the sources cited in the briefs or in the court's opinion suggesting that our law favors the exercise of self-defense over a decision to stand down or withdraw. In many cases, the split-second decision to fight back will appear improvident in hindsight.168  The law of self-defense protects the decision regardless. But it does so not because we think that aggression is always better than retreat, but because the imposition of criminal liability is a harsh consequence.
 [*P114]  We cannot decide whether the exercise of the right of self-defense will redound to the public good in the abstract. The devil will always be in the details. The majority effectively concludes that the right of self-defense can preserve and protect human life when it is exercised properly. Those are huge caveats. And they highlight the fact that the public interest analysis of the exercise of the right of self-defense will always require nuanced, case-by-case evaluation. Such evaluation is not a matter resolved by our law. It will require case-by-case refinement over time.
 [*P115]  And that fact reveals a fatal flaw in the majority's approach: If the public interest in the exercise of the right of self-defense depends on case-by-case evaluation, and not wholesale application of our law, then it cannot  be said that our policy redounds unquestionably to the public good, or that the matter falls beyond the reach of contract.169 
 [*P116]  An individual confronted by an assailant faces a dilemma—of whether to retreat or fight back. He may properly choose the former, even in the face of an imminent risk of injury. Doing so in no way undermines our public policy.170 
C
 [*P117]  The majority's final conclusion is that the public policy protecting the right of self-defense "outweighs employers' interest in being able "to manage their workforces and regulate their workplace environments to promote productivity, security, and similarly lawful business objectives.'" Supra ¶ 47 (quoting Touchard, 2006 UT 71, ¶ 17, 148 P.3d 945). Again the court's analysis is dependent on its framing of the question, however. Thus, in light of the summary judgment posture of the case (in which all reasonable inferences are given to the nonmoving parties), the majority assumes that the employee-plaintiffs "were "unable to safely disengage' from a threat of violence." Supra ¶ 51. And it even indicates that they "face[d] the prospect of severe injury or death with no opportunity to withdraw." Supra ¶ 51. In these circumstances, the court concludes that the right of self-defense outweighs the employer's interest in controlling its workplace, asserting that "[t]he law should not require employees to choose between keeping their jobs and protecting themselves or others from a serious, imminent threat of harm." Supra ¶ 51.
 [*P118]  As noted above, however, we have no reason to assume that these employees were really "unable to safely engage," much less that they faced "severe injury or death." Those premises are merely an artifact of the procedural posture of the case. And it may well turn out—and for reasons noted above, supra ¶¶ 8-9, I think it likely will—that the stronger inference is that the employee-plaintiffs in this case fought back unnecessarily. It also seems quite likely that most workers who are fired for defending themselves will fit that bill. It would be the rare employer indeed who would actually fire an employee for defending himself in the face of a threat of "severe injury or death with no opportunity to withdraw." Supra ¶ 51.
 [*P119]  Because that prospect seems so unlikely, moreover, I rather doubt that many employees faced with a life-or-death threat will actually stand down due to concerns over losing their job. That will surely be the outlier case. The more common case, by far, will be the opposite—in which the employee faced with less than a life-or-death threat, or with reasonable path to withdraw, nonetheless intervenes in an attempt at vigilantism.
 [*P120]  The majority concedes that the employer's interests outweigh the employee's in this latter circumstance. See supra ¶ 52. Yet it opens the door to claims for wrongful termination that substantially undermine the employer's ability to protect that interest. The threat of a tort claim for wrongful termination will yield substantial leverage for the employee who is fired for fighting back in the face of workplace violence. If, as I suspect is the case, most such employees will fall more in the vigilante camp than the life-or-death without the possibility of retreat camp, the net effect of today's decision will be to increase vigilantism.
 [*P121]  We should not formulate policy in this sensitive area on the basis of the outlier case. The majority assumes this case is the outlier in light of the procedural posture of summary judgment. But I doubt that assumption  reflects reality. And the decision protecting the right to sue in this outlier circumstance seems sure to do more harm than good.171 
 [*P122]  I would reject the employee-plaintiffs' proffered basis for a public policy exception to the presumption of at-will employment. For reasons noted below, I find substantial support for my analysis in our own precedents and in those from other jurisdictions.
1
 [*P123]  Our decision in Hansen v. America Online, 2004 UT 62, 96 P.3d 950, seems to me to strongly undermine the employee-plaintiffs' claims in this case. Hansen rejects a public policy basis for a wrongful termination claim under the Utah Constitution, and implementing provisions of the Utah Code, protecting the individual right to bear arms. Id. ¶¶ 15-22 (citing Utah Const. art. I, § 6; Utah Code § 63-98-102). The plaintiffs in Hansen cited these provisions as sustaining their legal right to bear arms in the workplace, and thus to sue for wrongful termination when their employer fired them for bringing their guns to work. We rejected that argument, emphasizing the high bar for establishing a public policy exception based on the exercise of a legal right or privilege.
 [*P124]  First, we noted that the "exercise[] [of] a legal right or privilege" "poses analytical challenges different from, and generally greater than, the other[]" recognized grounds for a public policy exception to the presumption of at-will employment. Id. ¶ 10. With respect to the other grounds, for example, we emphasized that an employer's decision to terminate an employee generally "serves no legitimate economic objective and corrodes civil society." Id. That point is clear, for example, with respect to a termination of employment based on an employee's refusal to "commit an illegal or wrongful act," or decision to perform a "public obligation," or to report to a "public authority criminal activity of the employer." See id. ¶ 9 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citing Ryan, 972 P.2d at 408) (listing these other grounds for public policy exception). Yet that does not necessarily hold for a termination based on an employee's exercise of a legal right. An employer may have an entirely legitimate interest in that circumstance. See id. ¶ 11 (noting that in this context "both the employer and the employee may appeal to public policy in aid of their cause"). And the employer's interests may well outweigh the employee's. See id. (indicating that "[t]he analysis of whether the public policy exception applies to a particular legal right or privilege will frequently require a balancing of competing legitimate interests: the interests of the employer to regulate the workplace environment to promote productivity, security, and similar lawful business objectives, and the interests of the employees to maximize access to their statutory and constitutional rights within the workplace").
 [*P125]  In Hansen we found the employer's interests to prevail. And we based that decision on our determination that the governing constitutional and statutory provisions did not conclusively establish that an employer's "fundamental" interest in controlling its "private property" "must give way" to the "right to possess firearms" in safeguarding "private and public security." Id. ¶ 21 (noting that the employee-plaintiffs had cited "evidence that private and public security is better safeguarded by an armed citizenry"). Citing the legislative debate on the operative statute, we found a lack of "clarity" in the alleged legislative intent to elevate the right to possess firearms over "the rights of an employer." Id. ¶ 24. And finding at most "ambivalence" on the part of the legislature on this matter, we rejected the employees'  claim, concluding that they had failed to carry their burden of showing that the right to bear arms clearly outweighed the employer's right to preserve the safety of its private property. Id.
 [*P126]  The above analysis applies with equal force to this case. Nothing in the Utah stand-your-ground statute suggests that the legislature intended to elevate the right of self-defense above the rights of an employer to preserve the safety of its workplace. The criminal law of self-defense, in fact, has long been understood to harbor "ambivalence" on the prudence of any particular act of defensive aggression, so long as there was an objectively reasonable basis for it.172  That is evident in the fact that not all forms of aggression that are justified under the criminal law seem appropriate in hindsight.173  Again, a person subjected to attack may reasonably choose to stand down or seek to retreat even when that course seems difficult. Nothing in our law indicates any "clarity" on the part of our legislature in extending the terms of a privilege from criminal liability to a legal right of employment. I see no basis for concluding that our legislature intended to elevate the right of self-defense as defined in our criminal law over the important right of an employer to protect the security of its workplace in the manner it sees fit.
 [*P127]  Indeed, the lack of criminal liability when an employee meets force with force in the workplace tells us nothing of relevance to the question as framed in Hansen—of whether the legislature has spoken with "clarity" on an intent to elevate an individual's exercise of the right of self-defense over "the rights of an employer" to control the workplace. Id. ¶ 24. In my view it has not. The legislature has said nothing on the question whether a policy preserving for the employer the final say on the reasonableness of any particular act of self-defense is an agreement void against public policy.
2
 [*P128]  Unlike the majority, I view the authority cited by Wal-Mart as thoroughly persuasive. See supra ¶¶ 66-72 (citing cases from three state supreme courts and two federal courts). The cited cases undermine the majority's approach and reinforce a number of the elements of my analysis.
 [*P129]  In Scott v. Extracorporeal, Inc., for example, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court contrasts a dispute over the proper exercise of the right of self-defense with "areas of an employee's life in which his employer has no legitimate interest." 376 Pa. Super. 90, 545 A.2d 334, 341 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1988) (internal quotation marks omitted). The Scott court assumes, moreover, that the employee-plaintiff in that case "acted in self-defense," noting that this assumption is dictated by the summary judgment posture of the case. Id. at 342. But it nonetheless declines to "deny the employer the right to dismiss due to its subjective evaluation that the employee behaved disruptively." Id. And it ultimately upholds the employer's prerogative to resolve disputes on  such questions, moreover, highlighting concerns with "transferring to the judicial forum the duty of evaluating the propriety of management decisions." Id. at 343 (internal quotation marks omitted).
 [*P130]  The North Carolina Court of Appeals' analysis in McLaughlin v. Barclays Am. Corp., 95 N.C. App. 301, 382 S.E.2d 836 (N.C. Ct. App. 1989), rests on similar conclusions. In that case the court "accept[s]" the employee-plaintiff's "contention that his striking his subordinate resulted solely from his efforts to protect himself from battery," given the need to view the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Id. at 838. But the McLaughlin court nonetheless proceeds to reject the claim to a public policy exception. In so doing, it concedes that the evidence, in the light most favorable to the employee-plaintiff, "shows that his superiors displayed virtual indifference to his repeated requests for help in dealing with a problem employee," and that their investigation of the incident in question was "shallow and perfunctory." Id. at 840. But McLaughlin nonetheless concludes that there was no basis for a wrongful termination claim under a public policy exception, emphasizing that there was no basis for finding "bad faith" by the employer, and highlighting the problem with a contrary holding: "Were we to recognize a cause of action in this case," the court warns, "every employee involved in an altercation would assert a self-defense justification, spawning [a] deluge" of litigation undermining the employer's prerogative of controlling the workplace. Id.; see also Bagwell v. Peninsula Reg'l Med. Ctr., 106 Md. App. 470, 665 A.2d 297, 312-13 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1995) (quoting the foregoing portion of McLaughlin approvingly).
 [*P131]  The majority seeks to distinguish these cases on the ground that they involved plaintiffs who "articulated a right of self-defense that encompassed instances where employees used force in retaliation or in circumstances where there was an opportunity to withdraw." Supra ¶ 67. That is an accurate characterization of the employer's position in the above cases. But it overlooks the employee's view, which is accepted by the court for purposes of summary judgment. And, as noted, the courts in Scott, McLaughlin, and Bagwell all accept the employee's assertion of reasonable self-defense for purposes of their analysis. But they nonetheless reject the assertion of a public policy right to sue for wrongful termination on the basis of a need to respect employer discretion in this sensitive area.174 
 [*P132]  I would resolve this case on that basis. I would uphold the enforceability of Wal-Mart's arrangement with its employees—an arrangement, from all that appears, that is in line with that adopted by retailers far and wide. And I would reject the employee-plaintiffs' assertion of a public policy basis for a wrongful termination claim regardless of the premise on summary judgment that they acted reasonably in self-defense and lacked a reasonable means of withdrawal.175 
  II
 [*P133]  I agree with the majority that our public policy in Utah encompasses the goal of "preserv[ing] and protect[ing] human life." Supra ¶ 40. But I see no reason to believe that an agreement like that which Wal-Mart has with its associates—of requiring them to retreat instead of fighting back, reserving a right of self-defense if necessary, and leaving the resolution of doubts on whether the policy was followed to the employer—will undermine that policy. If anything, Wal-Mart's arrangement will preserve and protect human life in the long run. Presumably that's why such policies are endorsed in occupational safety standards and adopted by so many retailers.
 [*P134]  The court's contrary conclusion seems to me to run a substantial risk of thwarting the very policy it is touting. In upholding the employee-plaintiffs' right to sue, the court is undermining the ability of retailers like Wal-Mart to enforce their policies of nonresistance in the workplace. The inevitable result will be more violence, not less.
 [*P135]  In the long run, the majority's decision also threatens substantial violence to the at-will presumption under Utah law. If the public policy exception does not depend on the identification of an existing policy in authoritative sources of law, we will no longer have an at-will presumption. We will have a common law of wrongful termination.
 [*P136]  Even in the field of self-defense, I doubt this case will be our final say on the availability of an employee's right to sue for wrongful termination. More difficult cases undoubtedly loom on the horizon.
 [*P137]  Consider, for example, a case of third-party defense, in which an employee intervenes to protect a co-worker who is under a threat of violence by an armed robber 100 feet away. The employee's decision to intervene—to run across the room to confront the robber—would be justified under our law of self-defense.176  But does our Utah public policy clearly encourage such acts of vigilantism—or clearly bar an employer from terminating an employee who engages in such activity? See supra ¶ 40 (basing the conclusion that the right of self-defense is of public importance on the fact that our law encompasses "the doctrine of defense of others"). The majority seems to suggest so. It asserts that the exercise of the right of defense of a third party "protects individuals from serious injuries and deters the completion of crime." Supra ¶ 40. But I see nothing in our law to support that conclusion. And workplace de-escalation policies (and the social science studies behind them) suggest that the opposite approach is likely preferable in the broad run of cases. See supra ¶ 76 n.138.
 [*P138]  Alternatively, consider the circumstance of a bank teller who receives a note from an armed robber that says "Hand over the money in your till, and no one gets hurt," but responds by trying to disarm the gunman. Again the teller would be fully justified under our criminal law—even if the attempt at intervention causes the gunman to open fire on the teller and on other innocent bystanders. But is this exercise of self-defense so clearly in the public interest that an employer violates public policy for firing the employee for this act of vigilantism? The majority's analysis suggests that that would be the case. The teller, after all, is in no better position to retreat than the Wal-Mart associates at issue in this case. Yet again it seems to me that the bank employer would be acting entirely reasonably in holding its employees to the requirement of turning over the money instead of fighting back in this instance. And the reasonableness of such a decision should sustain the bank's right to terminate the teller's employment without  facing the potential liability of a wrongful termination claim.
 [*P139]  Perhaps the majority would respond to these scenarios by adding new limitations on the policy of self-defense that it adopts today. As these or other cases arise, perhaps the court will say that our state policy of self-defense is restricted not only by a duty to retreat when reasonable, but also by a bank teller's duty to accede to a demand for money instead of fighting back, or by an employee's duty to stand down instead of intervening to help a co-worker. Those would be wise limitations if our goal is preserving safety in the workplace. But they are nowhere found on the face of the court's opinion, and they would further underscore the violence that today's decision does to our longstanding presumption of at-will employment.
 [*P140]  We should limit public policy grounds for wrongful termination suits to cases involving the exercise of rights of employment enshrined in our law as written. I dissent from the majority's creation of a right of wrongful termination based on a policy of its own formulation, as that decision threatens workplace safety and undermines our longstanding presumption of at-will employment.

 

