 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P42]  This case presents important questions of interpretation under article X, section 8 of the Utah Constitution. That provision states that "[n]o religious or partisan test or qualification shall be required as a condition of employment, admission, or attendance in the state's education systems." Utah Const. art. X, § 8. The plaintiffs in this case challenge a statute, referred to herein as SB 78, under this provision. SB 78 provides for partisan election of members of the State Board of Education. The plaintiffs assert that a partisan election amounts to a "partisan test" and that members of the Board have "employment . . . in the state's education systems."
 [*P43]  A threshold question is the meaning of the constitutional phrase, "employment . . . in the state's education systems." The plaintiffs cite dictionary definitions of "employ" that encompass the mere provision of service to something or someone. And they contend that Board members have "employment" in the "state's education systems" because they make core contributions to those systems. The lieutenant governor's view of "employment" is different. He says that this is a legal term referring to a formal relationship with an employer. And he contends that Board members are not legally employed by the "state's education systems" because they have no employment relationship with a school or other traditional component of our education system.
 [*P44]  The majority rightly sides with the lieutenant governor on this question. And it does so, to its credit, by acknowledging some shortcomings of dictionaries in resolving the sort of question presented here, and by turning to corpus linguistic analysis to fill in the gaps. Supra ¶¶ 18-25. I endorse this move wholeheartedly.1  And I concur in the court's  opinion to the extent it relies on corpus linguistic analysis in support of the conclusion that a person has "employment in" an organization only if there is a formal legal relationship between a worker and an employer—the mere provision of some sort of service or contribution to an organization is insufficient. See supra ¶ 25.
 [*P45]  That conclusion resolves a threshold question of ambiguity under article X, section 8 of the Utah Constitution—as to the meaning of the phrase "employment . . . in." But it does not resolve the case before us. We still have to decide whether members of the State Board of Education qualify as having "employment" in some entity, and if so whether they have "employment . . . in the state's education systems." The majority seeks to sidestep these issues. It first identifies a range of different tests that might dictate whether someone has "employment" in a given organization and then by concluding that there is a degree of ambiguity as to whether members of the Board could be deemed to be employed in "the state's education systems."2  And it asserts that this ambiguity sustains a decision to uphold the constitutionality of SB 78 under the "presumption that legislative enactments are assumed to be constitutional." Supra ¶ 39.
 [*P46]  I write separately because I have some trouble with the court's assertions of ambiguity as a basis for resolving this case. I again agree with the court's threshold interpretation of the scope of the meaning of "employment." But that determination is not sufficient to resolve the case. And the court falls short in its further attempts to identify a clear basis for its disposition.
 [*P47]  In my view the majority opinion falls short in three respects. First, the majority never articulates a standard of deference under its stated presumption of constitutionality. It simply announces the presumption and notes that it calls for a measure of deference. In applying the presumption and citing cases in support of it, the court effectively identifies a wide range of different levels of deference. This is also problematic. Without a stated standard of deference we cannot decide whether there is an "ambiguity" sufficient to sustain a presumption of constitutionality.
 [*P48]  Second, the majority never articulates a governing standard for judging whether someone would qualify as having "employment . . . in" an organization. It just cites a range of standards and says that means there is ambiguity. Without a stated standard I do not see how we can judge whether a person could be deemed to have "employment . . . in" a given organization (or even how much ambiguity there is in answering that question).3  I concede that the question of the appropriate standard may be difficult to fully resolve on the briefing and record before us. But we need to at least define the standard we would use to determine whether Board members have an "employment" relationship with some entity before we can conclude that there is ambiguity sufficient to turn to a presumption of constitutionality.
 [*P49]  Third, the majority never examines the question of what qualifies as a part of "the state's education systems." This is a crucial question. Even though there may be some ambiguity about whether members of the Board of Education have "employment" in some state body, I think it's clear that they  do not have "employment . . . in the state's education systems."4  This becomes clear once we define what constitutes "the state's education systems"—in my view a clear reference to schools, universities, or related institutions that directly provide education to students. I would resolve the case on this ground. Because Board members have no formal legal relationship with a school or related institution, I would hold that SB 78 raises no constitutional problem and thus that there is no need to fall back on a presumption of constitutionality. I explain the basis for this conclusion below, after first outlining in more detail the concerns that I have with the majority opinion.
I
 [*P50]  The majority hangs its hat on an ambiguity in the meaning of the notion of a person's "employment" in the "state's education systems." It cites a series of different tests for assessing a person's employment relationship, identifies a "general pattern" in these tests, and ultimately concludes that it is not clear whether "Board members" have an employment relationship "with the state's education systems" under the governing tests. Supra ¶¶ 26-30, 37-38. In light of these ambiguities, the court falls back on a presumption of constitutionality, holding that SB 78 withstands constitutional scrutiny because there is a degree of ambiguity in whether Board members are people who have "employment" in the "state's education systems." Supra ¶¶ 39-40.
 [*P51]  I have some trouble with this line of analysis. I find too much ambiguity in the court's assertion of ambiguity—or, in other words, insufficient transparency in the court's articulation of (a) the degree of ambiguity sufficient to trigger deference to the legislature, (b) the standard that would apply in determining whether a Board member has an "employment" relationship, and (c) what counts as part of the "state's education systems." I highlight each of these concerns below, along with some thoughts on how I would approach each issue.
A
 [*P52]  The linchpin of the court's opinion is the presumption of constitutionality.5  But the presumption is not articulated with any specificity. Nowhere does the court identify the degree of ambiguity that is sufficient to trigger the presumption of constitutionality, or, in other words, the level of deference we owe to the legislature.
 [*P53]  At one point the majority says that all "reasonable doubts" should be resolved in favor of constitutionality. Supra ¶ 39. But the court never seeks to define what we mean by a "reasonable doubt." And it compounds the confusion by citing cases that call for deference ranging from "some deference" on one hand to "great deference" or "significant . . . deference" on the other. Supra ¶ 39. The court's ultimate holding seems to turn on yet another standard. In upholding SB 78 the majority says that there is "no real proof" that the lieutenant governor's view of the statute "was incorrect." Supra ¶ 40.
 [*P54]   I am uncomfortable with this level of imprecision. Without a clear statement of the standard of deference we owe to the legislature we open the door to the risk of arbitrary decision-making. And we deprive the parties of a clear statement of the real basis for our decision.
 [*P55]  If this case turned on a statement of the applicable standard of deference I would press for a clarification of the governing standard. For reasons stated below, however, I do not think this case turns on a precise statement of the presumption of constitutionality. Instead I think we can resolve this case by concluding that members of the Board of Education are not part of the "state's education systems." I just flag this issue to highlight the need for us to reach it in some future case.
B
 [*P56]  The majority also stops short of articulating a standard for assessing the existence of an "employment" relationship. It takes a step in the right direction in concluding that "employment" under Article X involves more than a vague contribution or provision of service. See supra ¶ 25. But the conclusion that the constitutional reference to "employment" in the state's education system requires the existence of a formal legal relationship still leaves open the question of what it takes to establish such a relationship. And the court never answers that question. It never establishes a governing test for assessing the existence of an employment relationship. Instead it cites a range of possibly applicable legal standards—"myriad definitions" of the notion of employment and a series of "artful tests" for assessing whether there is an employment relationship. Supra ¶¶ 26-31. The failure to pin down a legal standard, moreover, is cited as the basis for the court's determination of ambiguity—ambiguity sufficient to sustain deference to the legislature. See supra ¶ 31 (citing the existence of "myriad definitions and artful tests" as a basis for the conclusion that there is ambiguity as to the meaning of the constitutional language).
 [*P57]  This too is problematic. I don't think we can say that there is "ambiguity as to what was intended by the term employment" because we stop short of identifying a controlling legal standard for the term "employment." The court never says it is impossible to articulate a governing standard of "employment," or that we can't decide whether Board members have an employment relationship with the "state's education systems." It just says that this area of law is a difficult one, and that the employment status of Board members is unclear. Fair enough. But the fact that employment status is often unclear doesn't mean that it is necessarily unclear here. And I don't think we can say that the question of the employment status of Board members is a matter of significant ambiguity until we do our level best to articulate a governing legal standard.
 [*P58]  The court takes a step in that direction in citing a common law "right to control" test that incorporates multiple factors. See supra ¶ 26 (citing Mitchell H. Rubinstein, Employees, Employers, and Quasi-Employers: An Analysis of Employees and Employers Who Operate in the Borderland Between an Employer-and-Employee Relationship, 14 U. PA. J. BUS. L. 605, 617 (2012)). It notes that this test has been viewed as a "default" standard that applies "in the absence of a statutorily provided definition of 'employee.'" Supra ¶ 26 (citing Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318, 323, 112 S. Ct. 1344, 117 L. Ed. 2d 581 (1992)). Yet the court stops short of embracing this test as the governing standard for "employment" under the Utah Constitution. Instead it states that "some courts have endorsed an 'economic realities test'" that is aimed at assessing the "economic dependence of the alleged employee" on the employer, supra ¶ 28 (quoting Rubinstein, supra, at 626) (citing Nowlin v. Resolution Tr. Corp., 33 F.3d 498, 505 (5th Cir. 1994)), and that others "apply some hybridized form of both tests that centers on the notions of control and economic dependency," supra ¶ 29.
 [*P59]  Ultimately, the majority declines to select a test to guide the inquiry into employment status under the Utah Constitution. It just notes "the central role that control and direction play in guiding and defining" the inquiry, while also indicating that "economic  dependence" is likewise a significant consideration. Supra ¶ 29. And it proceeds to cite provisions of the Utah Code that exclude members of a board of directors (but not officers) "from the definition of employees of a corporation." Supra ¶ 35. In various places the court also alludes to the idea that a person who exercises "official" discretion or "sovereign" power may not qualify as an employee, suggesting that "employment" is something done by more "ministerial" workers. Supra ¶ 36 n.13.
 [*P60]  Despite the absence of any controlling legal test the court nonetheless suggests that Board of Education members may be "separate from employees" under the "general pattern of common usage" of the legal notion of "employment." Supra ¶ 38. It bases that conclusion on a series of propositions: Board members "have no masters within the state's education systems," "they are not under contract with the state's education systems," "they have no controllers within the state's education systems," and "their compensation is remitted not by the state's education systems but by Utah's Department of Administrative Services." Supra ¶ 38. This conclusion is hedged by the ultimate assertion of "a certain level of ambiguity" on the question whether Board members qualify as having employment in the state's education systems. But the above premises seem to be the central grounds for the majority's determination of ambiguity.
 [*P61]  I disagree with this mode of analysis. I cannot see how we can state grounds for a possible conclusion that Board members are not employees without first making an attempt at a standard for judging whether they are employees. The court effectively alludes to a possible standard in several places in the opinion. But without a statement of a governing standard—or at least the minimum criteria for employment status—I do not see how we can say whether Board members can qualify, or even whether there is ambiguity as to whether they qualify.
 [*P62]  I would at least attempt to identify some minimal criteria for employment status. And I would then seek to apply them to the facts of the case to determine whether Board members qualify.
 [*P63]  The court goes astray, in my view, in suggesting one possible criterion—that only lower-level, ministerial workers can qualify as having "employment" in an organization. See supra ¶ 36 n.13.6  I don't doubt that we sometimes speak of "employees" as those occupying lower-level, ministerial positions. We use the term in that sense when we are distinguishing "employees" from "management," or the like. In that sense, moreover, I don't doubt that Board members are not employees—they are not ministerial workers but the ultimate in upper-level management. Yet I'm not comfortable concluding that they therefore cannot qualify as having "employment" in any organization. Workers who fulfill upper-level management roles and thus do not report to (nor are controlled by) any other individuals seem nonetheless to qualify as having "employment" in the sense that seems relevant here—in that they are not outsiders with an independent contractor status. The majority's own analysis suggests as much. At one point, the court cites the Utah Revised Business Corporation Act, which explicitly designates corporate officers as employees. Utah Code § 16-10a-102(18). And yet officers who orchestrate the corporation's operations and are not subject to day-to-day control by other individuals are certainly not lower-level, ministerial workers. So I don't think this criterion is sufficient. I don't think it tells us that Board members cannot be viewed as having "employment" in any organization.
 [*P64]  For these reasons I think we need to identify a governing standard before opining on whether Board members have "employment . . . in" some state entity. I concede that the briefing and arguments before us do not point clearly to a single standard. But I don't think the solution to this problem is to cite a point of ambiguity and turn to a presumption  of legislative validity. See supra ¶¶ 31, 39. We can and should call for supplemental briefing if we believe we need help deciding what standard controls here.
 [*P65]  I see no need to do that here, however. We can avoid this question if we can conclude that Board members have no legal relationship with an entity that is part of the "state's education systems." This highlights a final concern with the majority opinion.
C
 [*P66]  Members of the Board of Education may well have employment somewhere within the state government. The majority never says otherwise. Instead its analysis is focused on the lack of control by or a contract or compensation from "the state's education systems." See supra ¶ 38.
 [*P67]  This underscores my final concern: The court nowhere seeks to define "the state's education systems." And without a definition of that term, there is no logical way for the court to conclude that the undefined "systems" do not compensate, contract with, or control the members of the Board.
 [*P68]  The majority seems to be suggesting that Board members may not qualify as having employment with any entity—even the state government in general. I'm skeptical of that proposition for reasons noted above. See supra ¶ 63. But the court should openly embrace this premise if that is the basis for its decision. Without such a premise the court's opinion seems to be missing a step. We cannot properly say that "the state's education systems" do not compensate, control, or contract with members of the Board unless we define "the state's education systems."
 [*P69]  For the above reasons I do not think the majority has identified an adequate basis for resolution of this case. I concur in the judgment of the court, however, because I agree with the threshold premise that "employment" requires a formal legal relationship with an employer and because I conclude that members of the Board of Education have no such relationship with "the state's education systems." I reach that conclusion because I conclude that the Board of Education is not part of "the state's education systems" as that term is used in the Utah Constitution.7 
 [*P70]  Article X, section 1 says that "[t]he Legislature shall provide for the establishment and maintenance of the state's education systems." And the only entities it lists as included in the "state's education systems" are a "public education system" and a "higher education system." Section 2 of article X then goes on to provide that "[t]he public education system shall include all public elementary and secondary schools and such other schools and programs as the Legislature may designate," and that the "higher education system shall include all public universities and colleges and such other institutions and programs as the Legislature may designate." So all the listed entities that are part of the "state's education systems" are schools, colleges, and universities.
 [*P71]   The listed entities may not constitute an exhaustive list. Article X speaks to what is "include[d]" in the "state's education systems." The argument thus could be made that the institutions defined in sections 1 and 2 are merely exemplary.8  Even so, in context the word "include" is simply an acknowledgement of the legislature's power to establish additional schools, institutions, and programs as part of the "state's education systems." And that power would be limited—under the ejusdem generis canon of construction—to the kinds of institutions and programs that fulfill a similar function as those expressly listed in the constitution.9  The listed institutions and programs are all aimed at providing instruction to students. So although the legislature can expand the "state's education systems" by establishing additional institutions and programs to educate students, its power is limited. It cannot, for example, establish a new transportation agency or economic development program and call it part of the "state's education systems." Instead the legislature has the authority to designate new entities aimed at providing education to students, and establishing such entities as part of "the state's education systems."
 [*P72]  This conclusion is also reinforced by the noscitur a sociis canon of construction as applied to another clause of article X, section 8—the clause referring to "employment, admission, or attendance in the state's education systems." The terms "admission" and "attendance" reinforce the notion that the "state's education systems" involve entities that provide education to students. Students seek "admission" and "attendance" in schools or similar entities. Those terms would not make sense as applied to an entity that merely makes policy for the operation of schools. We commonly speak of a person seeking "admission" or "attendance" in a school, university, or college. Those words, however, are not associated with a policymaking body like a Board of Education.10  And that reinforces the conclusion that "the state's education systems" encompass schools, colleges, universities, and similar programs that provide education directly to students.11 
 [*P73]   With this in mind, I would ask whether Board members have a formal relationship with an entity that falls within the "state's education systems." And I would conclude that they do not. The Board does not directly educate students. Rather it exercises "general control and supervision of the public education system." Utah Const. art. X, § 3. The Board's duties are largely defined by statute. They include the responsibility to "develop policies and procedures related to federal educational programs," "make rules[] that require notice and an opportunity to be heard for an education entity affected by a state board action," control "[s]chool lunch revenues," and "establish rules and minimum standards for the public schools that are consistent with [the] public education code." See Utah Code §§ 53E-3-401, -501-17. None of these duties are within the functions filled by the institutions and programs listed in article X, section 2.
 [*P74]  Even if the Board of Education could be brought within the "state's education systems" as defined in article X, that article limits the "state's education systems" to those schools, institutions, and programs that the legislature designates. Utah Const. art. X, § 2. And the legislature has not designated the Board of Education as an institution or program that is within the "state's education systems." This is supported by the fact—which the majority notes—that Board members are compensated by the Department of Administrative Services.
 [*P75]  There is a significant sense, of course, in which the Board of Education affects state education policy. But I do not see how that renders the Board a part of the "state's education systems." This argument proves too much, as it would sweep in not just the Board but also the legislature—which also affects education policy but cannot be thought to be subject to any constitutional bar on partisan elections.
 [*P76]  Because I believe that the Board of Education does not fall within the "state's education systems," I would hold that Board members do not enjoy "employment . . . in the state's education systems." Thus they are not subject to article X, section 8's prohibition on partisan or religious tests as a condition of employment. I view this as a more transparent way to reach the same decision the majority reaches.

 

