
 [*P22]  I concur in the judgment reversing the summary judgment entered by the district court in favor of bankruptcy trustee Stephen Rupp. I write separately, however, because I conclude that Rupp lacks standing to pursue a claim under the Utah Fraudulent Transfer Act (UFTA). For reasons explained below, I would reverse on the ground that Rupp's case should be dismissed for lack of standing.
 [*P23]  The UFTA authorizes suit by "creditors" or by those with "a right to payment." See Utah Code § 25-6-2, -8. Under the majority's reading of UFTA and the Bankruptcy Code, trustees will always have standing. But the Utah Legislature, in conjunction with Congress, cannot alter the judicial power bestowed by our state constitution and the inherent limitations imposed by standing and similar doctrines. Rupp does not qualify for standing, and we should not reach the merits.
 [*P24]  To have standing a trustee must show that "the challenged transfer involved an interest of the debtor in property, i.e., the debtor transferred property in which it had  an interest." ASARCO LLC v. Ams. Mining Corp., 396 B.R. 278, 316 (S.D. Tex. 2008) (requiring, for standing purposes under § 544 of the Bankruptcy Code, the trustee to prove the debtor had an interest in the transferred stock). The transfer that Rupp is seeking to set aside is the transfer of the possessory value to Moffo for a period of time post-dating Bayrock's perfection of its interest in that value by three years—a period of time in which the debtor had no interest in the possessory value.
 [*P25]  The majority seems to agree. It observes that there is no injury here, and thus concludes that the trustee could never have had an interest in that to which he was not entitled. See supra ¶¶ 17-20 (using language such as "theoretical harm" and "no-harm-no-foul," and noting that under the "clear language of the Act," Rupp essentially had nothing he could lay claim to since the house and the rents flowing from it were entirely the property of the mortgage company).1 
 [*P26]  I see no basis for the trustee's standing in light of the above. Trustees may pursue claims "if [the] claim is a general one, with no particularized injury arising from it, and if that claim could be brought by any creditor of the debtor." See, e.g. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. PepsiCo, Inc., 884 F.2d 688, 701 (2d Cir. 1989). Conversely, where a claim is "specific" to a creditor (such as when one creditor holds a perfected security interest), it is a "legal or equitable interest only of the creditor," and the trustee lacks standing to bring it. Bd. of Trs. of Teamsters Local 863 Pension Fund v. Foodtown, Inc., 296 F.3d 164, 169-70 (3d Cir. 2002) (emphasis added).
 [*P27]  Claims that are general, with no "particularized injury" arising from them, and that "could be brought by any creditor" are precisely the sorts of claims that belong to the bankruptcy estate. But claims that belong to one creditor, the denial of which would result in a "particularized injury" and which accordingly could not "be brought by any creditor of the estate" do not belong to the estate, and thus are not within the reach of the trustee. The trustee simply has no third-party standing to sue on behalf of such a creditor, and therefore suffers no particularized injury.
 [*P28]  This problem is apparent in the district court's award of the rents to Rupp. After deeming the transfer fraudulent, the court awarded $34,200 to Rupp, to then be placed in the bankruptcy estate for creditors to sort through. But those rents belonged to Bayrock, not Rupp or any of the debtor's other creditors. Giving them to someone else is not an appropriate exercise of our judicial power. For that reason the trustee lacks standing. I would reverse on that basis, without reaching the merits.

 

