 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P87]  The majority opinion is a model of originalist analysis on a range of important questions. In rejecting Santiago Maese's assertion of a state constitutional right to a jury trial on a traffic infraction, the court presents persuasive grounds for crediting the "original public meaning" of the Utah Constitution as the basis for our decision. Supra ¶ 19. And it proceeds to outline a careful, sophisticated methodology for assessing such meaning—an approach that appropriately frames the relationship between original intent and original meaning, supra ¶ 19 n.6, helpfully identifies the "public" whose meaning we seek, supra ¶ 21 n.7, and carefully sifts through relevant historical material to show that the generation of the framing of the Utah Constitution would not have viewed a mere charge on an infraction (which carries  no potential term of incarceration) to give rise to a right to a jury trial, supra ¶¶ 34-44.
 [*P88]  I concur wholeheartedly in the above-noted aspects of the majority opinion, and commend Justice Pearce for the laboring oar he has taken in cementing these refinements in our jurisprudence. I write separately, however, because I disagree with the specific line established by the court in reaching its holding. I see no basis for the decision to establish conclusively that the "potential for incarceration of longer than a month is what the people of Utah understood to guarantee the right to a jury trial." Supra ¶ 82. I would instead hold only that Maese has failed to carry his burden of establishing a constitutional right to a jury trial for an offense (here, an infraction) for which there is no risk of incarceration.
 [*P89]  This is a conclusion amply supported by the extensive historical material presented in the majority opinion—material that shows quite clearly that the original meaning of the jury guarantee in the Utah Constitution did not establish a jury trial for all offenses. Supra ¶¶ 34-53. And Maese has not overcome the presumption of constitutionality to establish that a traffic infraction would have been entitled to a jury trial. See supra ¶¶ 34-53.34  I see no reason to tread any further in our disposition of this case. We can simply hold that Maese has not overcome his burden of proving that an offense like a mere infraction, which carries no risk of incarceration, triggers a right to a jury trial. And we can reserve for a future case—a case in which the matter is squarely presented—a decision on the question of what precise term of incarceration may trigger a constitutional right to a jury trial.
 [*P90]  The majority's basis for the one-month standard is a provision of the 1898 Utah Code—Utah Revised Statutes section 241—which provided for a bench trial for offenses triggering a term of incarceration of less than thirty days. See supra ¶¶ 70, 82-84. I agree that this provision has some salience in informing the public understanding of the legal right to a jury trial at the time of the ratification of the Utah Constitution. In light of section 241 and other cited statutory provisions, I can see a basis for the conclusion that "the people of Utah at the time of statehood would have understood that if a defendant in a criminal prosecution faced less than a month's incarceration, she was not entitled to a trial by jury." Supra ¶ 83. That is fine as far as it goes. But the majority's public understanding is not tied to a constitutional right to a jury trial. It is tied only to a statutory provision. And the majority is making the leap that the public would have viewed the scope of the statutory right to a jury trial to be the same as the underlying constitutional right. That may not follow.
 [*P91]  The 1898 Legislature could have been establishing a statutory jury trial right that exceeded the constitutional floor. If so, the majority may be right that the public would have viewed the right to a jury trial to be triggered by a charged offense with a "potential for incarceration of longer than a month." Supra ¶ 82. But that would not tell us anything useful about the public understanding of the Utah Constitution. It would just tell us about the public understanding of the state code.
 [*P92]  The Legislature, alternatively, may have inadvertently been seeking to drop below the floor—in violation of the founding document. That Legislature was not immune from constitutional violations.35  And that is  another ground for doubting the constitutional significance of the statutory evidence cited by the majority.
 [*P93]  The majority acknowledges these problems. It openly concedes that "even the first Legislature could have enacted an unconstitutional law or decided to provide statutory protections broader than those they placed in the Constitution." Supra ¶ 46. Despite these broad concessions, the majority pivots quickly to the contradictory assertion that the enactments of the first Legislature nonetheless "help us understand the contemporaneous public meaning of certain constitutional terms and concepts." Supra ¶ 46. The logic of this pivot is nowhere explained. And I cannot accept it. "[K]nowing what cases the 1896 Utah Legislature thought would be tried to a jury" does not tell us "what the people of Utah would have understood the constitution to mean when it refers to the 'criminal prosecutions' for which a jury is guaranteed.'" Supra ¶ 46 (emphasis added). The terms of the 1898 Code do not tell us what the Legislature thought the Utah Constitution required; they tell us only what the Utah Legislature decided to require as an exercise of its legislative authority. And since the Legislature could have been aiming above the constitutional floor, the terms of the statute are not helpful as "indirect evidence" of the public understanding of the constitutional right to a jury trial. Supra ¶ 82.
 [*P94]  The majority cements in place a one-month standard on the ground that this is a "functional test" that is more workable than other possible standards rejected by the court (as to whether an offense is a "municipal" or "regulatory" offense, for example). Supra ¶¶ 77, 79. I agree with the court's rejection of these alternative standards. But I see no logical reason to establish a one-month incarceration standard as the basis for resolving this case, just as I see no adequate basis in the originalist record for the conclusion that the public understanding of the constitutional right to a jury trial would have been dictated by the statutory standard established by the Utah Legislature in the 1898 Code.
 [*P95]  I would simply hold that Maese has failed to carry his burden of establishing a right to a jury trial for a traffic infraction, an offense that carries no risk of incarceration.36  And I would reserve for another day—a case in which this precise question is presented—a decision on whether an offense carrying a short term of incarceration may trigger such a right.
 [*P96]  The majority objects to my approach on the ground that it renders the originalist inquiry a "fruitless exercise where a combination of the presumption of constitutionality and the imprecisions in the historical record persistently frustrate our ability to interpret the Utah Constitution." Supra ¶ 83 n.31. This is problematic, in the majority's view, because it allows originalism to use a "murky historical record" as a "one-way ratchet" that refuses to establish a constitutional right. Id. I am puzzled by this response. The cited effect of the presumption of constitutionality is not a bug in my application of this legal tool; it is the standard feature of such a presumption. If a party seeking to challenge the constitutionality of a law enacted by the representatives of the people fails to provide a sufficient basis for the establishment of a clear constitutional standard, then the presumption of constitutionality kicks in. The whole point of that presumption is to preserve the law as enacted by the people in the face of only a "murky" basis for setting it aside.37 
 [*P97]  And the record here is concededly murky. The majority concedes as much by hedging  its reliance on the 1898 Code with a series of caveats: (a) the terms of the code will not "always serve as a Rosetta Stone for understanding our constitution"; (b) the "persuasive value" of the code "will wax and wane depending on the constitutional provision at issue and the other evidence available about the public understanding of that provision"; (c) "a party will often need to do more than argue that because the 1898 Code contained a certain provision or term, related provisions of the Utah Constitution must have an identical meaning"; and (d) "[c]ounsel would do well to explain how those statutory provisions can help us understand the public meaning of specific constitutional language." Supra ¶ 84 n.32. These and other concerns are more than a sufficient basis for the conclusion that there is ample doubt about the precise line envisioned by the constitutional guarantee of a right to a jury trial in "criminal prosecutions." With this in mind, we can properly conclude that Maese has not carried his burden of proving that the Utah Legislature infringed his constitutional rights in denying him a jury trial on a charge of a traffic infraction carrying no risk of incarceration. In my view, however, there is no basis for the additional conclusion that the constitutional standard should depend in all future cases on whether a defendant is subject to a one-month (or more) term of incarceration.
 [*P98]  My proposed application of the presumption of constitutionality does not render originalism a "one-way ratchet" in every case. It just recognizes that the historical record here is insufficient to draw the line proposed by the majority.
 [*P99]  The majority complains that if the record in this case "is insufficient to permit us to interpret our constitution using an originalist approach, it is difficult to imagine what . . . would ever allow us to opine." Supra ¶ 83 n.31. That makes little sense to me. Again, the historical record here is strikingly scant. The majority's caveats concede the problem. And the problem is highlighted by the acknowledgement that the line drawn by the 1898 Code could be either above or below the constitutional floor. See supra ¶ 46. If in fact the 1898 Code is no Rosetta Stone, and a party "need[s] to do more" than cite its provisions, then Maese has failed to carry his burden of proof on the precise constitutional line to be drawn in our resolution of this case. Supra ¶ 84 n.32. That is the ground on which I would decide this case.
 [*P100]  We can resolve the constitutional uncertainty conceded by the majority by falling back on the longstanding notion of a presumption of constitutionality. See supra ¶ 96 n.37. Doing so is not a "frustrat[ion] [of] our ability to interpret the Utah Constitution." Supra ¶ 83 n.31. It is an affirmation of a longstanding tenet of originalism—the presumption of constitutionality, which is deeply embedded in our law. See James B. Thayer, The Origin and Scope of the American Doctrine of Constitutional Law, 7 Harv. L. Rev. 129, 140-146 (1893) (establishing the historical basis for the rule requiring the judiciary to defer to the Legislature and uphold legislation unless it clearly contravenes the constitution); Philip Hamburger, Law & Judicial Duty 309-16 (2008) (suggesting that at the time of the Framing, judges were to follow a law unless it created a "manifest contradiction" with a higher law). Maese bears the burden of overcoming this presumption. And his failure to do so is a basis for a ruling against him.

 

