 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P20]  The case before us on appeal was filed in the district court under the Postconviction Remedies Act (PCRA), Utah Code section 104. Appropriately so, as Brandon Sandoval had previously challenged his conviction on direct appeal, and the PCRA provides "the sole remedy for any person who challenges a conviction or sentence for a criminal offense and who has exhausted all other legal remedies, including a direct appeal." Utah Code § 78B—9-102(1). This statutory remedy "replaces all prior remedies for review, including extraordinary or common law writs." Id. The PCRA "does not apply" to "(a) habeas corpus petitions that do not challenge a conviction or sentence for a criminal offense; (b) motions to correct a sentence pursuant to Rule 22(e), Utah Rules of Criminal Procedure; or (c) actions taken by the Board of Pardons and Parole." Id. § 78B-9-102(2). But except for these excluded proceedings, the PCRA forecloses any claim for relief not allowed by its terms. See id. § 78B-9-102(1). Such preclusion is "[t]he whole point of the sole remedy provision" of the PCRA. Meza v. State, 2015 UT 70, ¶ 43, 359 P.3d 592 (Lee, A.C.J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment).
 [*P21]  The majority gives some effect to this provision. In affirming the dismissal of the claims presented on appeal the majority notes that "Sandoval has abandoned all claims seeking relief under the PCRA" and correctly concludes that "[t]he relief he now seeks is [not] rooted in section 104." Supra ¶¶ 10, 11. Sandoval's remaining claim asserts that his right to due process was violated "when the evidence was destroyed without actual notice nearly two years after the final disposition of [this] case." Supra ¶ 12. Because this claim seeks relief on "a basis on which the PCRA offers no statutory remedy," the court rightly holds that this claim is foreclosed by the sole remedy provision of the PCRA and is thus not properly before us on this appeal. Supra ¶¶ 11, 13 (holding that "Sandoval's standalone due process claim is therefore improperly before us").
 [*P22]  The majority fails to carry this conclusion to its logical end, however. Despite holding that Sandoval's claim is foreclosed by the PCRA, the majority nonetheless proceeds to opine on the merits of an asserted due process right to postconviction DNA testing. See supra ¶¶ 14-17. I write separately because I respectfully disagree with this portion of the court's opinion. By rejecting Sandoval's due process claim the majority fails to give effect to the sole remedy provision of the PCRA. Importantly, the court also runs afoul of the doctrine of constitutional avoidance.1 
 [*P23]  The doctrine of constitutional avoidance is an important "principle of judicial  restraint." Utah Stream Access Coal. v. VR Acquisitions LLC, 2019 UT 7, ¶ 55, 439 P.3d 593(concluding that disposition of constitutional claim was necessary because no non-constitutional claim was asserted). When a case may be decided on either constitutional or non-constitutional grounds, the doctrine of avoidance directs us to resolve the case on non-constitutional grounds.2 
 [*P24]  The majority overrides this doctrine. Despite its conclusion that Sandoval's claims are statutorily barred, the court rejects Sandoval's claims on the alternative ground that they fail on their merits. It states that "even if we allowed Sandoval to shift the focus of his rule 65C petition to a due process inquiry separated from the statutory rights granted by the PCRA, he has failed to carry his burden here in demonstrating a due process violation under the Utah Constitution." Supra ¶ 13. In so doing the court proceeds to analyze the due process questions presented in this case—outlining a basis for a party to "demonstrate that the due process clause of the Utah Constitution" may establish a right to post-conviction DNA testing, supra ¶ 16, and adopting a standard for judging whether the destruction of evidence would "violate[] that right" assuming "such a right existed." Supra ¶ 17.3 
 [*P25]  We should not be opining on matters of state constitutional law in a case in which the constitutional claim is foreclosed by statute. Doing so ignores the sole remedy provision of the PCRA4  and fails to honor the doctrine of constitutional avoidance.

 

