
 [*P79]  In January 2014, Sergeant Cory Wride noticed Meagan Grunwald's truck stopped on the side of the highway and pulled over to investigate. This would be the last act of public service he would ever perform. As Wride sat in his vehicle, Grunwald placed her foot on the brake to allow her boyfriend, Jose Garcia, to shift the truck into drive and aim a gun through the rear window. Grunwald held the truck steady as Garcia made good on his promise to "buck [Wride] in the fucking head" by firing seven bullets into Wride's patrol car. Wride died shortly thereafter.
 [*P80]  Grunwald and Garcia continued their rampage as the police gave chase. At one point, Grunwald slowed her truck down to allow Garcia to shoot and wound another officer. After their truck was disabled, Grunwald waved down a passing vehicle so Garcia could order a pregnant driver and her child out of the car. The chase ended in a fatal shootout after Grunwald and Garcia abandoned their stolen vehicle and ran toward another. As Garcia lay bleeding and dying, Grunwald began screaming at the police, "You fucking ass holes, you didn't have to shoot him. You fucking shot him. Oh my God, you fucking shot him."
 [*P81]  Grunwald pleaded not guilty to all charges, asserting a compulsion defense and claiming that Garcia had kidnapped her and threatened to kill her and her family. The jury found her guilty as charged, convicting her for (among other things) acting as an accomplice to the aggravated murder of Sergeant Wride.
 [*P82]  Grunwald challenged her convictions on appeal, asserting in part that her trial counsel was ineffective for failing to object to errors in the jury instruction related to her murder charge. The instruction allowed the jury to convict Grunwald as an accomplice to aggravated murder if it found that she "[i]ntentionally, knowingly, or recklessly solicited, requested, commanded, encouraged, or intentionally aided [Garcia] who" committed the elements of the principal crime and it also found that she "[i]ntended that [Garcia] commit the [principal crime], or . . . [w]as aware that [Garcia's] conduct was reasonably certain to result in [Garcia] committing the [principal crime], or . . . [r]ecognized that her conduct could result in [Garcia] committing the [principal crime] but chose to act anyway . . . ." State v. Grunwald, 2018 UT App 46, ¶ 31, 424 P.3d 990 (internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis in original). Grunwald identified three alleged errors in this instruction. She claimed that it erroneously allowed a conviction if Grunwald (1) "recklessly" aided Garcia, (2) aided Garcia in some way unconnected to Wride's murder, or (3) aided Garcia knowing that his actions (as opposed to her own) were reasonably certain to result in Wride's murder. Id. ¶ 32.
 [*P83]  The court of appeals agreed that the jury instructions were in error on all three counts and concluded that Grunwald's counsel was deficient in failing to object to them. Id. ¶¶ 24, 32. But it upheld Grunwald's conviction as an accomplice to aggravated murder because she failed to show prejudice. Id. ¶ 54. It held that Grunwald had not established that there was a reasonable probability that a correct jury instruction would have led to a different outcome at trial. Id. ¶ 49.
 [*P84]  The court of appeals got the prejudice analysis right. The majority is wrong to overturn its decision and reverse Grunwald's conviction despite the overwhelming evidence against her. Grunwald was no idle, ignorant bystander. She was at least a knowing collaborator in her boyfriend's acts of murder—as evidenced by her knowledge of his criminal background, threats against her father, violent behavior on the way to the murder scene (firing shots out the car window), and stated intention to shoot Sergeant Wride in the head, as well as her own participation in the second shooting and carjacking that followed.
 [*P85]  I agree that the first two errors alleged by Grunwald should have generated an objection from trial counsel. But I respectfully dissent because I disagree with the majority's prejudice analysis both on the law and under the facts in the record. The majority's prejudice analysis is legally problematic because it turns on an assessment of what the jury likely did or could have done with an incorrect jury instruction. See supra ¶¶ 36, 40, 43-44, 52-54, 63, 75-77. But this is not the governing standard of prejudice. In a case (like this one) involving a claim for ineffective assistance of counsel, the standard for assessing prejudice turns on what a jury would reasonably likely have done with a correct jury instruction. See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 694, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1984). I dissent from the court's attempt to revise and reformulate this standard. And I also dissent from the majority's conclusion that Grunwald carried her burden of establishing prejudice under this standard. For reasons noted above and explained further below, I see no basis for a determination of a reasonable probability that a properly-instructed jury would have acquitted Grunwald of the charge against her.
 [*P86]  The court of appeals concluded that the jury instruction in this case contained a third error—the failure to require proof that Grunwald knew her own actions were "reasonably certain to result in" Wride's murder. Grunwald, 2018 UT App 46, ¶ 46, 424 P.3d 990. This requirement is arguably rooted in dicta in our opinion in State v. Jeffs, 2010 UT 49, ¶ 45, 243 P.3d 1250. But that dicta is incompatible with the terms and conditions set forth in Utah Code section 76-2-202 as interpreted in our opinion in State v. Briggs, 2008 UT 75, 197 P.3d 628. And the majority in this case rightly repudiates the dicta and clarifies the governing standard. See supra ¶ 61 n.73. I endorse that portion of the majority opinion but conclude that the repudiation of the dicta in Jeffs effectively collapses the third alleged error in the jury instruction into the second.
 [*P87]  In the paragraphs below I consider each of the alleged errors noted above and explain the basis for my dissenting position. First I acknowledge that counsel was deficient in failing to object to an instruction allowing the jury to convict Grunwald if it found she only "recklessly" aided Garcia in the murder, but I conclude that there is no reasonable probability that a properly-instructed jury would have entered an acquittal. Next I concede that counsel was deficient in failing to object to an instruction allowing the jury to convict Grunwald if it found that she helped Garcia for some purpose other than to kill Wride, but again I determine that this error did not result in prejudice. And lastly I endorse the majority's decision to repudiate dicta in Jeffs requiring that an accomplice know that her own actions themselves are reasonably certain to result in the principal crime.
I
 [*P88]  I agree with the majority that trial counsel was deficient in failing to object to a jury instruction allowing the jury to convict Grunwald if it found that she only "recklessly" aided in Garcia's commission of aggravated murder. See supra ¶ 34. But I see no basis for the conclusion that the failure to object to this instruction was prejudicial.
A
 [*P89]  The standard for judging Strickland prejudice is set forth in controlling precedent from the United States Supreme Court. Our own decisions have also elaborated on the standard. A showing that trial counsel was deficient is not alone sufficient to justify a reversal. The defendant must also establish prejudice under a counterfactual analysis, showing that there is a "reasonable probability" that "the result of the proceeding would have been different" absent counsel's errors. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 694, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1984); see also State v. Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶¶ 28, 42, 424 P.3d 171 (stating that, in the context of counsel's failure to object to erroneous jury instructions, the court must "ask if the defendant has met the burden of showing that the decision reached would reasonably likely have been different absent the errors" (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 695-96)).
 [*P90]  We have clarified that "[a] reasonable probability of a different outcome is in no way synonymous with . . . 'any reasonable basis in the evidence.'" Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶ 44, 424 P.3d 171 (citation omitted). The "reasonable probability" standard is a "relatively high hurdle to overcome." Id. It is not enough to merely "show that the errors had some conceivable effect on the outcome of the proceeding." Strickland, 466 U.S. at 693. The probability of a different outcome must be "reasonable." Id. at 694. And here I see nothing more than a conceivable possibility that a jury that had been properly instructed to find that Grunwald's intentional aid was given intentionally or knowingly (and not merely recklessly) would have rendered a different verdict.
 [*P91]  In convicting Grunwald, the jury rejected her defense that she was compelled to act as Garcia's accomplice. And with good reason. Not only did Grunwald hold the brake for several minutes as the pair waited for a gap in traffic, she did so even as Garcia announced his intention—twice—to "buck [Wride] in the fucking head." And she prevented the truck from jerking forward until Garcia had fired five of his seven shots out the rear window.
 [*P92]  The jury's rejection of the compulsion defense may not necessarily mean that the jury rejected all of Grunwald's arguments. See supra ¶¶ 56-57. But the jury verdict can inform our analysis of whether it is reasonably probable that a properly_instructed jury would have reached a different verdict. And the jury's rejection of the compulsion defense weighs against Grunwald's assertions of prejudice in light of the totality of the evidence in the record.
 [*P93]  The record evidence that Grunwald knowingly assisted in her boyfriend's murder of Sergeant Wride was extensive and compelling. First we should consider the knowledge that Grunwald brought with her on the day of the murder. She clearly knew that her boyfriend was a violent person with a troubling criminal record. She had told a friend that Garcia had been in prison for "almost kill[ing] a guy" with a screwdriver. She testified that she was aware that he had been convicted of manslaughter and that her cousin had told her about his "previous crime" and sent her an article with "some pretty serious facts in it." And just weeks before Wride's murder, she witnessed Garcia get into a heated argument with (and possibly even pull a gun on) her father.
 [*P94]  Grunwald took this knowledge with her when she got into the truck with Garcia on the day of the murder. And she could not have reasonably thought that they were going out for a cruise; when Grunwald initially resisted Garcia, saying that she needed to pack, Garcia angrily threatened, "If you don't go with me, stuff's going to happen." Garcia's actions en route to the murder scene would not have dispelled Grunwald's understanding of Garcia's mindset. As they drove past a Maverik convenience store, Garcia fired two gunshots out the window. And when Wride pulled up behind them, Garcia vowed he was "not going back to prison."
 [*P95]  This is the background against which the jury would have considered Grunwald's testimony about Garcia's threats to "buck" Wride in the "head." Garcia made those threats while readying and positioning his gun to fire out the back window of the truck. Under these circumstances, there could have been no doubt about Garcia's intentions. Surely he wasn't talking about the "head" of the officer's car. He was speaking of shooting the officer dead in the head—a move that, again, could not have been a surprise to Grunwald given her knowledge of her boyfriend's past and his actions earlier that day.
 [*P96]  Granted, Grunwald testified that she didn't understand that Garcia was talking about killing Sergeant Wride. But the jury was entitled to find that testimony utterly lacking in credibility. And in light of all of the evidence set forth here, I conclude that any reasonable jury would have done just that—and thus would also have been likely to disregard all her other claims of misunderstanding. This thoroughly devastates Grunwald's assertions of prejudice. If any reasonable jury would have found that she was lying about not knowing what Garcia meant when he threatened to "buck him" in the "head," and therefore found her to lack credibility as a witness, then there is no reasonable probability that a properly-instructed jury would have found that she acted only recklessly.
 [*P97]  The majority faults me for "disregard[ing] the only direct evidence we have of what occurred inside Ms. Grunwald's truck"—Grunwald's testimony. Supra ¶ 30. But I am not disregarding that testimony. I am viewing it in light of all the evidence in the record—what occurred outside and inside the truck. Some of the relevant evidence is direct and some is circumstantial. But nothing in our law requires us to credit direct evidence over circumstantial evidence. When the direct evidence (testimony) is utterly lacking in credibility, the law is to the contrary. The prejudice inquiry asks about reasonable probabilities, and that necessarily requires us to make a counterfactual determination as to how a properly-instructed jury would have assessed all the evidence.
 [*P98]  The majority breaks two points of new ground in concluding otherwise: (a) it suggests that "direct" testimony is somehow categorically more weighty in Strickland prejudice analysis, supra ¶¶ 30, 50 n.57; and (b) it rejects the propriety of credibility assessments and "assumptions" about what the jury would do with the considerations that I have highlighted, see supra ¶¶ 30, 40 n.47, 43 n.48, 53 n.59. But these premises are incompatible with controlling precedent from the U.S. Supreme Court. Strickland prejudice is all about the counterfactual. See 466 U.S. at 694. And that counterfactual analysis is to be performed in light of the "totality" of the evidence in the record—not just some of it. See id. at 695 ("[A] court hearing an ineffectiveness claim must consider the totality of the evidence before the judge or jury."). The majority alters that construct in its decision today. Fidelity to binding precedent requires us to consider any and all evidence in the record in conducting the Strickland prejudice inquiry. Circumstantial evidence cannot be categorically discounted. Nor can we be required to forgo an assessment of the reasonable likelihood of a jury's assessment of a witness's credibility.89  And the majority's contrary conclusion today will confuse and distort our law going forward.
 [*P99]  The majority's prejudice analysis is also undermined by Grunwald's actions after Wride's murder. In the hour and a half between the shooting and the police chase, Grunwald had a phone conversation with her mother. She appears to have been completely calm—her mother could remember nothing important about the call, while Grunwald testified that her mother simply asked whether she was okay and whether she had taken the garbage out.90  After the police chase began and Grunwald and Garcia abandoned Grunwald's truck near the Nephi Main Street exit, Grunwald ran after Garcia, following "wherever he went." As they ran toward the underpass, Garcia fired several shots at officers and vehicles near the freeway exit. Not once did he need to point his gun at Grunwald to make her do his bidding. And not once did she express any degree of misunderstanding about his plan. It was Grunwald, moreover, not Garcia, who waved down and stopped the vehicle that the duo carjacked. And when Garcia fled from that vehicle and began running toward another, Grunwald again followed. When the officers finally shot and stopped Garcia, Grunwald directed her anger at the police, purportedly shouting, "You fucking ass holes, you didn't have to shoot him. You fucking shot him. Oh my God, you fucking shot him." Grunwald later called the police "fucking hoes" as she sat in the police car.
 [*P100]  By Grunwald's own admission, she never expressed gratitude for or relief at being "rescued" from Garcia. As the police collected her belongings, she refused to surrender a ring that Garcia had given her. And after her arrest, Grunwald sent a letter to her uncle with a hand-drawn picture of a female hand and a skeleton hand forming a heart, the word "LOVE" gracing a ring on one of the female's fingers.
 [*P101]  For these reasons I find it nearly impossible to look at Grunwald's actions and conclude that her involvement was anything but knowing or intentional. I would therefore hold that there is no reasonable likelihood that a properly-instructed jury would have reached a different verdict.
B
 [*P102]  The majority's prejudice analysis "ha[s] the look and feel of presuming, rather than finding, prejudice." Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶ 38, 424 P.3d 171. In my view the court has not identified any persuasive grounds for concluding that Grunwald carried her burden of establishing that a jury required to find knowledge or intent would have been reasonably likely to enter a more favorable verdict.
 [*P103]  The majority's contrary conclusion is due in no small part to its sometime reformulation of the prejudice analysis. As previously noted, the U.S. Supreme Court has said that the question in ineffective-assistance-of-counsel cases is whether there is a "reasonable probability" that "the result of the proceeding would have been different" absent counsel's errors. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694 (emphasis added). This court has applied this test specifically to errors in jury instructions. See Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶¶ 28, 42, 424 P.3d 171 (stating that the court must "ask if the defendant has met the burden of showing that the decision reached would reasonably likely have been different absent the errors" (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 695-96)). In the face of this clear standard, the majority at times recasts the prejudice inquiry as a "two-part analysis" in which the court must first "identify the theoretical factual scenarios in which the error in the jury instructions permitted the jury to wrongfully convict the defendant," and second "determine whether there is a reasonable probability that . . . the jury convicted the defendant based on one of those impermissible scenarios."91 Supra ¶¶ 22-26 (emphasis added).
 [*P104]  This is a substantial reformulation.92  The proper inquiry is a counterfactual one—one in which we ask whether the defendant has established a reasonable probability that the jury would have reached a different verdict under a correct instruction. This has been accurately described as "a relatively high hurdle to overcome." Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶ 44, 424 P.3d 171. The majority's inquiry, by contrast, asks only whether there is a reasonable probability that the jury in fact based its decision on an error in the jury instruction. Supra ¶ 27. This effectively switches the default answer. A jury may come to a verdict with an erroneous instruction in mind. But that does not necessarily tell us whether there is a reasonable probability that the jury would have come down the other way in the absence of such an error. And the majority opinion has thus substantially altered the governing standard for Strickland prejudice.
 [*P105]  The majority's new inquiry asks whether a jury reasonably could have based its decision on the errors in the jury instruction. This is evidenced by the majority's repeated use of possibilistic rather than probabilistic language.93  This is problematic, as both the U.S. the same thing as an inquiry into whether there is a reasonable probability that the jury would have rendered a different verdict in Supreme Court and this court have said that it is "not enough for the defendant to show that the errors had some conceivable effect on the outcome of the proceeding." Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶ 42, 424 P.3d 171 (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 693).
 [*P106]  Using its new paradigm, the majority first faults the court of appeals for ignoring Grunwald's subjective mental state and resting its finding of no prejudice on the fact that "no reasonable person could have misinterpreted [Mr.] Garcia's objective" when he made his "buck" comment. Supra ¶ 35 (alteration in original). The court of appeals, the majority posits, should have considered the possibility that the jury could have believed that Grunwald's understanding of the situation fell below that of a reasonable person. Supra ¶ 38.
 [*P107]  Fair enough. It is theoretically possible that the jury found that Grunwald "did not understand Mr. Garcia's intentions even though a reasonable person would have." Supra ¶ 36. But again, the majority's premise misstates the standard. The question is not what the jury in fact found. It is whether there is a reasonable probability that the jury would have reached a different verdict if it had been instructed correctly.94 
 [*P108]  The majority eventually makes the required leap, claiming that the inclusion of the element of recklessness in the jury instruction gives rise to a reasonable probability of a different outcome (at least in conjunction with other errors that I address below). Supra ¶ 46. But the court's standard seems to shift between the two formulations. And the totality of the evidence (including Grunwald's actions after the shooting) demonstrates that Grunwald's actions were knowing and intentional. See supra ¶¶ 93-96, 99-100. The majority's grounds for concluding otherwise—and for painting Grunwald as a less-than-reasonable person—are unpersuasive.
 [*P109]  The majority begins its case for Grunwald's reduced comprehension skills by highlighting the fact that she was only seventeen at the time of the crime. It also claims that Grunwald suffers from a "learning disability" which "may have lessened her ability to understand the significance of Mr. Garcia's words." Supra ¶ 39. But Grunwald was tried and convicted as an adult, and that decision is not challenged on this appeal. As for the alleged disability, it is only vaguely specified in the majority opinion. And Grunwald herself never made anything of this disability in her briefing on this appeal. Understandably so. A closer look at the record reveals that Grunwald's learning disability is a reading disability. And surely her reading disability had no bearing on her ability to understand Garcia's statements, which were delivered orally—face-to-face—not in writing.
 [*P110]  For this reason there is no basis for the court's assertion that Grunwald's reading disability in any way "lessened her ability to understand the significance of Mr. Garcia's words." Supra ¶ 39. The majority falls short in its attempt to connect the dots on this point.95  And a further exploration of the record would seem to undermine the majority's move and confirm appellate counsel's decision to not advance this argument. Grunwald may have had a reading disability, but she was also an honor roll student, completed a Certified Nursing Assistant program, and was offered a scholarship for an Emergency Medical Technician program.
 [*P111]  Despite this, the majority concludes that Grunwald's age and learning disability, along with the fact that she "is easily intimidated, and was under a lot of stress at the time," create "a reasonable probability that the jury could have found Ms. Grunwald's ability to understand Mr. Garcia's intentions at the time to be less than that of a reasonable person." Supra ¶¶ 39-40 (emphasis added). Again, the court's use of "could have" here is significant. See Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶ 38, 424 P.3d 171 (noting that even when a court never "explicitly state[s]" that it is "presum[ing] prejudice," it might still be employing an analysis that has "the look and feel of presuming, rather than finding, prejudice"). It is not enough to say that there is a reasonable probability that this evidence could have caused the jury to believe Grunwald was only reckless. The question is whether there is a reasonable probability that the proper instruction would have resulted in a different verdict. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694 ("The defendant must show that there is a reasonable probability that . . . the result of the proceeding would have been different." (emphasis added)).96 
 [*P112]  Even if we place stock in the fact that Grunwald was seventeen, had a reading disability, was easily intimidated, and was under a lot of stress during the crime, we should recall the nature of Grunwald's claim. Grunwald didn't just claim she didn't know what Garcia meant by "buck him" in the head—she claimed she thought it meant that Garcia was only going to disable Wride's car. Are we supposed to believe she thought Garcia was going to buck Wride's car in the "head"? That is ridiculous. It would have made no sense for Grunwald to believe that Wride's car was the "him." And it is more than a little awkward to say you are going to disable another's car "in the head." There is simply no reasonable probability that the jury deemed Grunwald incapable of understanding Garcia's statement.97  The only reasonable probability I see is that a jury (whatever its instructions) would be offended by Grunwald's insistence that she thought a threat by a violent person with a homicide record—who was readying a gun to fire toward a police officer and had just stated that he wasn't going back to prison—was simply a threat to disable a police vehicle. Because no reasonable jury would have found that Grunwald's comprehension was below that of an average person, I cannot accept the majority's conclusion that it is reasonably probable that removing the "recklessness" component from the jury instruction would have changed the jury's verdict.
 [*P113]  The majority also claims that a "critical factual dispute" regarding the timeline of the murder helps create a reasonable probability that the jury would not have convicted Grunwald absent the erroneous jury instruction. Supra ¶¶ 41, 46. Initially, Grunwald testified that Garcia said he was going to "buck" Wride in the head after she placed her foot on the brake. Yet on cross-examination, Grunwald said that Garcia made this comment before she placed her foot on the brake.98  The majority claims that if the jury accepted Grunwald's initial story, it is more likely that it believed that Grunwald acted without the knowledge or intent to kill Wride (and presumably that the jury would not have convicted absent the erroneous jury instruction). Supra ¶ 43. I see two crucial problems with this argument. One is that it assumes that it is likely that a reasonable jury would have believed the timing Grunwald gave on direct examination. I see no basis for that conclusion. If anything, I see every reason to think that a reasonable jury would discount anything and everything in Grunwald's testimony that went in her favor. Once Grunwald made the ridiculous assertion that she thought a threat by Garcia to "buck him" in the "head" meant disable Wride's vehicle, a reasonable jury would have discounted anything else she said to try to exonerate herself. There is no reasonable likelihood that the jury credited Grunwald's first statement of the timing of events over the less favorable statement she made on cross-examination, let alone that an instruction eliminating "recklessness" would have caused the jury to alter its verdict.
 [*P114]  I also see a problem with the majority's analysis even assuming that a reasonable jury would have accepted the timing of events more favorable to Grunwald. Assume that Garcia made his comment after Grunwald put her foot on the brake. Once he did make his intentions clear, wouldn't she have still been playing lookout, holding the truck steady, and waiting to act as a getaway driver? The disagreement in timing does not change the fact that Grunwald continued to help Garcia knowing that Garcia intended to "buck" Wride in the head.
 [*P115]  The only way the majority's argument makes any sense is if one also assumes that Garcia made his comment "immediately before he commenced shooting." Supra ¶ 43. But no one argued that this was the case. Under the State's evidence, there were four and a half minutes between the time Grunwald's truck shifted into gear and the moment Garcia opened fire. Supra ¶ 10 n.1. Even under the version of events more favorable to Grunwald, Garcia made his "buck" comment three minutes and forty seconds after she placed her foot on the brake—fifty seconds before he opened fire. Supra ¶ 10 n.1. There is no reason to think that the jury believed Grunwald didn't have "time to process or otherwise react to the comment."99 Supra ¶ 43.
 [*P116]  The majority claims that the jury instruction's inclusion of recklessness is especially likely to have prejudiced Grunwald given that her trial counsel "expressly argued that she did not have an intentional or knowing mental state, but failed to cast doubt on the possibility of her having had a reckless mental state." Supra ¶ 45. But this is incorrect. Grunwald's counsel did cast doubt on the conclusion that Grunwald acted recklessly. In closing argument, Grunwald's attorney argued: "I'm going to ask you to find her not guilty, based on compulsion, based on a lack of intent, based on lack of knowledge, foresight, call it what you want . . . . Hindsight is such a wonderful prism to look through. It's 20/20 vision." (Emphasis added.) It seems clear that Grunwald's counsel was attacking each of the possible mens rea standards—disputing that Grunwald (1) acted intentionally, (2) acted with the requisite knowledge; or (3) acted while appreciating the possibility that Garcia could shoot Wride.
 [*P117]  Grunwald also defended against "recklessness" when she claimed that she believed police cars have bulletproof glass and that Garcia was specifically aiming to disable the patrol car. In support of this argument, she testified that she did not understand what "buck" meant, that Garcia refused to clarify the term, and that even after Garcia fired, she still believed he had only disabled Wride's vehicle. It is difficult to see how Grunwald's counsel "failed to cast doubt on the possibility" that Grunwald was "at most, only aware that her conduct could result in Mr. Garcia committing the crime . . . ." Supra ¶ 45. Grunwald definitely tried to cast doubt on the argument that she was aware Garcia could kill Wride. It just wasn't plausible (let alone reasonable) doubt. And no reasonable jury would have accepted Grunwald's position on that score—whatever the jury instruction.
 [*P118]  The majority explains how the jury could have come to a different conclusion had "recklessness" been removed from the instruction. But it doesn't demonstrate that it is reasonably probable that the jury would have. Given the overwhelming evidence that Grunwald acted intentionally and the scant evidence that she misunderstood Garcia, there is no reasonable probability that the jury would have acquitted Grunwald had it been given a correct jury instruction. I would therefore hold that counsel's failure to object to this first error did not prejudice Grunwald.
II
 [*P119]  I also agree with the majority and court of appeals' conclusion that counsel was deficient in failing to object to the jury instruction to the extent it permitted a conviction if Grunwald "'intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly solicited, requested, commanded or intentionally aided [Garcia] who' committed the principal crime." State v. Grunwald, 2018 UT App 46 ¶ 37, 424 P.3d 990 (alteration in original). The use of the word who rather than the word to inappropriately authorized the jury to convict Grunwald by finding that she aided Garcia in any way—including in some way unconnected to the murder—so long as Garcia actually committed aggravated murder. Supra ¶ 48. This was error. A conviction based on aid unrelated to the underlying crime is at odds with the requirement in State v. Briggs that an accomplice act with "the intent to aid the principal actor in the offense." 2008 UT 75, ¶ 13, 197 P.3d 628. It goes without saying that an accomplice's mental state must extend to the commission of the underlying crime.
 [*P120]  That said, I simply cannot believe that the jury would have acquitted Grunwald had the instruction more clearly eliminated the possibility of convicting her for aiding Garcia in the abstract. While theoretically possible, it is not reasonably probable that the jury convicted Grunwald for any reason except helping Garcia kill Wride, let alone that the jury would have acquitted Grunwald if the instruction had said to. The jury knew that Grunwald held the brake as—or maybe even after—Garcia announced he was going to "buck" Wride in the head. It knew that Grunwald kept the truck steady as Garcia fired five shots out the back. And it knew that she sped away as Garcia fired his final two shots. The context also matters. Grunwald was on trial for assisting Garcia in aggravated murder, not for helping Garcia disable a police vehicle or evade arrest.
 [*P121]  Once again, the majority grasps at the alleged uncertainty regarding the timeline of Garcia's "buck" comment and how that could have impacted Grunwald's mental state. This, the majority says, means that we "cannot be certain that the jury found that Ms. Grunwald's act of putting her foot on the brake was intentionally done to aid Mr. Garcia in committing the murder." Supra ¶ 50. Of course we cannot be certain. But that doesn't mean that there is a reasonable probability that the jury convicted Grunwald for helping Garcia do something besides murder Wride or that it would have acquitted her if properly instructed. Whether Grunwald put her foot on the brake before or after Garcia made his "buck" comment does not change the fact that she continued to hold the truck steady as Garcia made preparations to shoot Wride five times. And again I find it highly likely that a reasonable jury confronted with Grunwald's ridiculous interpretation of the "buck" comment would discount any other point that she made in her favor—especially a point on which she contradicted herself at trial. See supra ¶ 113. So I don't see any reasonable likelihood that a properly-instructed jury would have resolved the timing discrepancy in Grunwald's favor. It may be that it is "unclear from the record [when] Ms. Grunwald put her foot on the brake." Supra ¶ 51. But even if this uncertainty told us something about Grunwald's mental state (it doesn't, see supra ¶¶ 113-15), it does not follow that "there is a reasonable probability the jury would not have concluded that Ms. Grunwald's act . . . was done to intentionally aid Mr. Garcia to commit the murder." Supra ¶ 51 (emphases added). Again, the standard is not whether there is some uncertainty—it is whether there is enough uncertainty to create a reasonable probability of a different outcome.
 [*P122]  The majority also claims that there is a reasonable probability the jury found Grunwald "intentionally held her foot on the brake" but only "as a lookout and getaway driver in order to aid Mr. Garcia in disabling the police officer's vehicle." Supra ¶ 52. But to get there, the jury would have had to believe one or more of the following: that Grunwald misunderstood Garcia's buck-in-the-head comment (because she has a reading disability, is easily intimidated, and was under a lot of stress); that Garcia made the comment "immediately before" firing; or that Grunwald thought Garcia was shooting only to disable Wride's vehicle. As previously discussed, these alternatives are extraordinarily unlikely—Garcia made his "buck" comment vocally, gun in hand, while parked in front of Wride's vehicle—fifty seconds before firing. He said he was going to "buck him in the fucking head." The argument that Grunwald didn't have time to process the comment or believed that Garcia was only going to shoot Wride's car under these circumstances is absurd. The jury instruction may have been erroneous, but I cannot agree that the jury believed that Grunwald only ever meant to help Garcia disable a police car, or that switching to for who gives rise to a reasonable probability that the jury would acquit her of being an accomplice to aggravated murder.
 [*P123]  Similarly, the majority advances the theory that because Grunwald did not tell Wride about Garcia's gun, warrant, or true identity, perhaps the jury found that she "aided Mr. Garcia to avoid arrest, rather than to commit murder." Supra ¶ 53. But once again, the majority fails to explain how remote possibility rises to the level of reasonable probability. Just as there is no real chance that the jury believed that Grunwald only meant to disable Wride's vehicle and there is no reasonable probability that it would have acquitted her with the proper instruction, there is no likelihood that the jury believed that Grunwald was only trying to help Garcia evade arrest or a reasonable probability that, had the jury instruction been proper, the jury would have acquitted Grunwald.
 [*P124]  I take my colleagues' point that "we cannot assume that the jury accepted every aspect of the State's version of events" simply because Grunwald was convicted. Supra ¶ 57. But the majority's efforts to get to reasonable probability are the flipside of the same coin—the court assumes that if the jury had had the correct instruction, it would have acquitted because it accepted every aspect of Grunwald's version of events.100  The majority piles inference upon inference, attempting to cast doubt on the whole case by casting doubt on the (suspiciously many) individual pieces. This misses the forest for the trees.
 [*P125]  The majority seeks to minimize the significance of Grunwald's actions by isolating them from their relevant context. It does so, for example, by noting that the acts of "putting a foot on a brake and looking out of a car window" "seem fairly innocuous" when viewed in the abstract. Supra ¶ 50 n.57. Fair enough. But we don't consider these acts in isolation. We view them in the context of the totality of the evidence in the record when assessing the question of prejudice. State v. Garcia, 2017 UT 53, ¶ 28, 424 P.3d 171 (relying on Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 695-96, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674). And once we look at the totality of the evidence, it can no longer be said that Grunwald's acts "carry little persuasive weight." Supra ¶ 50 n.57.
 [*P126]  The majority's contrary conclusion is again rooted in its hang-up over the timing of Garcia's threat to "buck" the officer in the head. But this is a red herring for all the reasons noted above. See supra ¶¶ 114-15. And the acts of placing her foot on the brake while putting the truck in drive and serving as a lookout are the crucial elements of Grunwald's actus reus of assisting Garcia in his murderous scheme. In context, it seems apparent that Garcia asked Grunwald to take these steps to ensure that he could kill Sergeant Wride without being seen by passing vehicles or caught by pursuing vehicles after the shooting. No reasonable jury would have concluded otherwise or thought that Grunwald's acts of placing her foot on the brake and serving as a lookout were innocuous (or just reckless, or in furtherance of something other than murder).
 [*P127]  The majority also finds it "potentially problematic to hold Ms. Grunwald criminally liable for aggravated murder for the continued act of holding her foot on the brake." Supra ¶ 51 n.58. And it questions whether there is anything else she "could have done once Mr. Garcia announced his intentions." Supra ¶ 51 n.58. The obvious answer to this question is that Grunwald could have decided not to commit the actus reus that sustained the charge and conviction of accomplice liability. She could have stopped playing lookout for Garcia and placed the truck's transmission back into park. The majority dismisses Grunwald's alternatives as options that "would not necessarily have prevented Mr. Garcia from shooting Sergeant Wride." Supra ¶ 51 n.58. But the question is not whether Grunwald's acts were a but-for cause of Garcia's murder. See supra ¶ 61 n.73. It is whether Grunwald committed the acts of an accomplice—whether she intentionally aided Garcia in his principal crime. And I see no basis for a conclusion that Grunwald's acts fell short of that standard. The whole point of having Grunwald put her foot on the brake was to give Garcia a quick getaway. And her lookout function was a crucial aspect of the murderous scheme. These acts surely aided Garcia's murderous acts.
 [*P128]  Ultimately, the majority is really quarreling over the sufficiency of the actus reus for which Grunwald was charged and convicted. But Grunwald has not challenged her conviction on that ground. And we are in no position to undermine the verdict on that basis.101 
 [*P129]  It undermines the very concept of accomplice liability to suggest that Grunwald would have been guiltless even if she had fully appreciated Garcia's "buck" comments because Garcia could have killed Wride anyway. This is beside the point under our law, which has never allowed an accomplice to avoid liability by showing that the principal would have committed the crime anyway (even absent her acts of aiding). See supra ¶ 61 n.73 (conceding there is no but-for cause element in the law of accomplice liability). The question is whether Grunwald intentionally aided Garcia with the intent that Wride be murdered, not whether Garcia needed, used, or wanted her help. And for all the reasons identified above, I see every reason to conclude that there is no reasonable probability that a properly-instructed jury would have reached a different verdict on this question.
III
 [*P130]  The court of appeals identified a third basis for a determination of ineffective assistance of counsel. Citing State v. Jeffs, 2010 UT 49, 243 P.3d 1250, the court of appeals said that the jury instruction should have required proof that Grunwald "intended or knew that her conduct . . . would result in the commission of the principal crime." State v. Grunwald, 2018 UT App 46, ¶¶ 29-30, 36, 424 P.3d 990 (emphasis added). There is clear dicta in our Jeffs opinion to this effect. See 2010 UT 49, ¶ 45, 243 P.3d 1250 (stating that an accomplice to a principal crime with a "knowing" mens rea requirement must "know[] that his conduct will most likely cause" the principal offense). And the instruction at issue did not include this element.
 [*P131]  The majority rightly repudiates this aspect of the Jeffs opinion. It holds that Jeffs "should not be read to require that an accomplice's conduct be a but-for cause of the underlying crime for liability to incur." Supra ¶ 61 n.73. Because the governing statute does not include this element, the majority holds that Jeffs should be read "to require only that the accomplice knowingly committed his or her own actus reus in order to help the underlying crime be committed." Supra ¶ 61 n.73. So despite contrary dicta in Jeffs, the majority holds that there is no requirement of proof that an accomplice knew that her acts themselves would cause or result in the principal crime. It is enough to "show that the defendant knowingly or intentionally committed the actus reus to help the principal actor in committing the crime." Supra ¶ 61 n.73.
 [*P132]  I endorse this reformulation of the dicta in our Jeffs opinion. That dicta is incompatible with the governing statute and is properly revised by the court.
 [*P133]  This reformulation, in my view, defeats Grunwald's third allegation of ineffective assistance of counsel—the charge that trial counsel was deficient in not objecting to the jury instruction's failure to require proof that Grunwald knew that her actions were reasonably certain to "result in" the principal crime. Grunwald, 2018 UT App 46, ¶ 36, 424 P.3d 990. This was not an error under the majority's reformulation of Jeffs. And for that reason it cannot be a basis for a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel.102  I would reverse the court of appeals' conclusion to the contrary and affirm the conviction on that basis.
IV
 [*P134]  The relevant portions of the jury instructions in this case allowed the jury to convict Grunwald as an accomplice to aggravated murder if it found that she "[i]ntentionally, knowingly, or recklessly solicited, requested, commanded, encouraged, or intentionally aided [Garcia] who" committed the elements of the principal crime and it also found that she "[i]ntended that [Garcia] commit the [principal crime], or . . . [w]as aware that [Garcia's] conduct was reasonably certain to result in [Garcia] committing the [principal crime], or . . . [r]ecognized that her conduct could result in [Garcia] committing the [principal crime] but chose to act anyway . . . ." State v. Grunwald, 2018 UT App 46, ¶ 31, 424 P.3d 990 (internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis in original).
 [*P135]  The only errors contained in this instruction are those discussed in Parts I and II—those which allowed the jury to convict Grunwald based on a finding that she aided Garcia recklessly or in some way unconnected to Wride's murder. But those errors were not prejudicial. And the third alleged error was not an error at all because the instruction correctly applied our third-party liability statute.
 [*P136]  When reviewing ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claims, we are not required to make all inferences in the defendant's favor or equate theoretical possibility with reasonable probability. Because there is no reasonable probability that the jury would have come to a different outcome had the jury instruction been correct, Grunwald's counsel did not prejudice her by failing to object to errors in it. Her ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim should fail, and her conviction should be upheld. I respectfully dissent.

 

