 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P40]  I concur in the judgment of the court and in elements of the majority's analysis. Thus, I share the majority's goal of "giv[ing] effect to the intent of the Legislature," and of looking for such intent in "the text of the statute." Supra ¶ 10. And I agree that our interpretation of the operative statutory text "turns on the meaning of the term 'discharge' in the context of a 'dangerous weapon or firearm.'" Supra ¶ 11. Ultimately, moreover, I concur in the court's construction of this statutory phrase—as defining the element of prosecution in terms of "each discrete shot" expelled from a gun. Supra ¶ 1.
 [*P41]  I write separately, however, because I cannot resolve the ambiguity in the term discharge as the court does—by mere resort to the dictionary. I see the need to look elsewhere. I would interpret the terms of the statute by looking for real-world examples of its key words in actual written language in its native context. This sort of analysis has a fancy name—corpus linguistics. But it is hardly unusual. We often resolve problems of ambiguity by thinking of examples of the use of a given word or phrase in a particular linguistic context. I propose to do that (as I have in a couple of prior opinions) on a systematic scale—by computer-aided searches of online databases in an effort to assemble a greater number of examples than I can summon by memory on my own.
 [*P42]  I begin with a description of the question presented in this case as I understand it. Then I outline my approach to answering it. And I close with a response to criticisms to my methodology.
I
 [*P43]  My starting point is in line with the majority's: I would seek to discern the intent of the legislature, and to find it in the language it enacted into law. When the text is plain that enterprise is straightforward. But in cases litigated to an appeal that is rarely the case. The statutory text in such cases is often ambiguous. One form of ambiguity concerns a conflict between the "ordinary" and "specialized" meaning of a term. Thus, a threshold question is whether the legislative text conveys some specialized meaning—as in the case of a statutorily defined term, a scientific phrase, or a legal term of art.1  If so that is the end of the matter; the specialized  meaning controls if it was intended by the legislature.2 
 [*P44]  Another form of ambiguity concerns a contest between two different definitions of a word in common usage. But "[t]he fact that the statutory language may be susceptible of multiple meanings" does not leave us without an answer, as all but one of the meanings is often "eliminated" by the structure or context of the statute. Olsen v. Eagle Mountain City, 2011 UT 10, ¶ 13, 248 P.3d 465. When neither of two competing meanings can be so eliminated, however, we opt for the meaning we deem as more "ordinary." See Hi-Country Prop. Rights Group v. Emmer, 2013 UT 33, ¶¶ 18-19, 21-22, 304 P.3d 851.
 [*P45]  This case presents this latter question. No one has suggested that discharge is a specialized term,3  or that the structure of the statute eliminates one of the parties' proposed definitions. So we are left to construe the relevant statutory language to convey the "ordinary meaning" of its terms—the meaning its words would have in the mind of a "reasonable person familiar with the usage and context of the language in question." Olsen, 2011 UT 10, ¶ 9, 248 P.3d 465.4 
 [*P46]  Dictionaries are a good "starting point" for analyzing ordinary meaning. Hi-County Prop. Rights Grp. v. Emmer, 2013 UT 33, ¶ 19, 304 P.3d 851. They are "useful in cataloging a range of possible meanings that a statutory term may bear." Id. (citing Henry M. Hart, Jr. & Albert M. Sacks, The Legal Process: Basic Problems in the Making and Application of Law 1375-76 (William N. Eskridge, Jr. & Phillip P. Frickey eds., 1994) [hereinafter Hart & Sacks]). Dictionaries provide "'an historical record, not necessarily all-inclusive, of the meanings which words in fact have borne.'" Id. (quoting Hart & Sacks, at 1190). "Such a record, however, will often fail to dictate 'what meaning a word must bear in a particular context.'" Id. (quoting  Hart & Sacks, at 1190). "That question will often require further refinement—of selecting the best meaning among a range of options, based on other indicators of meaning . . . ." Id.
 [*P47]  This case requires such "further refinement." It is "one of those cases where the dictionary fails to dictate the meaning that the statutory terms 'must bear' in this context." State v. Canton, 2013 UT 44, ¶ 14, 308 P.3d 517. That is because, as in Canton, "dictionary definitions" of the operative terms of the statute "leave the statute semantically open to" both parties' positions. Id. On one hand, as the majority indicates, discharge is susceptible to the definition advanced here by the State—of discharge as "to release from confinement" or "to shoot." Supra ¶ 12 (quoting Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 356 (11th ed. 2012)).5  Yet that is not the only sense of discharge identified in the dictionary. Discharge is also understood as "to empty of a cargo: UNLOAD." See Webster's Third Int'l Dict. 644 (3d ed. 2002). And that is the sense of discharge advanced here by the defense. Rasabout urges a unit of prosecution defined by unloading or emptying the contents of a weapon, asserting that the latter sense of discharge supports his position.
 [*P48]  The majority paints part of the relevant picture. It cites the first of the above definitions and adopts it as the operative sense of discharge of a firearm under Utah Code section 76-10-508(1)(a). But the majority fails to acknowledge the second dictionary definition set forth above. And I am unsure of its basis for preferring the first definition over the second.
 [*P49]  In context, I see three possible grounds for the court's conclusion. But each falls short.
 [*P50]  First, the definition invoked by the court may be listed first in the dictionary, see Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary at 356 (listing, as the first sense of the verb discharge, "to relieve of a charge, load, or burden"), but there is no such thing as a "main" or "primary" dictionary definition.6  "The dictionaries most relied upon by courts in statutory interpretation make no claims about the ordinariness of the words they define or the senses they assign to those words." J.M.W. v. T.I.Z. (In re Baby E.Z.), 2011 UT 38, ¶ 98, 266 P.3d 702 (Lee, J., concurring) (citing Stephen C. Mouritsen, The Dictionary Is Not a Fortress: Definitional Fallacies and the Corpus-Based Approach to Plain Meaning, 2010 BYU L. REV. 1915, 1925-45 (discussing problems with dictionary usage by courts)). "Nor do they present their lexical information in a way that reveals 'ordinary' usage." Id. "A number of dictionaries simply rank their definitions according to evidence of historical usage." Id. (emphasis added). The dictionary cited by the majority, Webster's, "expressly disavows any attempt to establish a hierarchy of ordinariness in the ranking of its senses, admitting that sometimes an 'arbitrary' listing of senses is used." Id.; see also Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary at 20a. So the dictionary generally cannot provide the basis for preferring one of its definitions over another.
 [*P51]   Second, the majority seems to attribute significance to the apparent meaning of the component parts of the term discharge. In embracing the shoot sense of discharge, the court notes that the term "is made up of . . . a prefix ['dis'] and the root word ['charge']." Supra ¶ 12. And because "dis" conveys a "negative or opposite," and "charge" indicates a "quantity of explosive," the majority concludes that "the clearest reading of the statute is that discharging a weapon or firearm means shooting a weapon or firearm." Supra ¶ 12. The ordinary meaning of a word is not always discernible by simple addition, however. Many words take on meanings that bear a strained relation to the sum of their constituent parts—including words with the prefix "dis," like disease or disheveled. The former is more than a mere state of unease.7  And the latter is not the opposite of sheveled.
 [*P52]  In this case, discharge does appear to convey the undoing of a charge. But that conclusion still begs the question of the nature of the charge being undone. Even if the relevant charge is, as the majority says, a "quantity of explosives," we must decide here what quantity of explosives must be undone to count as a discharge. The majority says that it's a "single projectile with a single explosion." Supra ¶ 13. That sounds fine. But Rasabout's alternative is no less defensible; all of the bullets in a gun's magazine also qualify as a "quantity of explosives." So the majority's deconstruction of the component parts of discharge does not yield a conclusive answer to the interpretive question presented.
 [*P53]  That leaves a third explanation for the majority's conclusion: The court's sense of discharge as shoot may simply be an expression of the majority's linguistic intuition. That is the way most problems of lexical ambiguity are resolved by our courts.8  Instead of acknowledging and rejecting contrary senses of a statutory term, judges tend to ignore them—identifying only the sense of a word they deem ordinary without acknowledging any others.
 [*P54]  Reliance on judicial intuition is entirely appropriate. When confronted with problems of ambiguity in legal text, judges must employ their intuition to discern the proper sense of its terms. Too often, however, we proffer our intuition as if it were authoritative; and when we do so in a manner cloaking alternative senses of the operative terms, we deprive the parties and the public of a clear understanding of the complex nature of the linguistic problems that we confront. We also risk confirmation bias, or just old-fashioned mistake. The former risk is well-known.9   And it is magnified in cases where our analytical methods are opaque. Our human intuition of ordinary meaning, moreover, is fallible. As linguists have noted, our analysis of word meaning and usage "remains hidden from introspection," and may thus too often be mistaken.10 
 [*P55]  For these reasons we should be more transparent about our means of resolving the difficult problems of interpretation that come before us. When confronted with a contest between two competing constructions that each find tenable support in our lexicon, we should openly acknowledge the ambiguity. And when we resolve that ambiguity based purely on instinct or intuition, we should be open about that.
 [*P56]  I would do so here. Instead of embracing one accepted sense of discharge of a firearm and ignoring the contrary understanding, I would acknowledge both. To the extent my intuition tells me (as it does) that the single shot sense of discharge is the more ordinary sense of discharging a firearm, moreover, I would openly present that as the basis for our decision. I would also take the matter a step further, however. I would also check my intuition against publicly available means for assessing the ordinary meaning of a statutory phrase. My proposed means for doing so are outlined below.
II
 [*P57]  In this age of information, we have ready access to means for testing our resolution of linguistic ambiguity. Instead of just relying on the limited capacities of the dictionary or our memory, we can access large bodies of real-world language to see how particular words or phrases are actually used in written or spoken English. Linguists have a name for this kind of analysis; it is known as corpus linguistics.
 [*P58]  The fancy Latin name makes this enterprise seem esoteric and daunting. It is not. We all engage in it even if we don't attach the technical label to it. A corpus is a body, and corpus linguistics analysis is no more than a study of language employing a body of language.11  When we communicate  using words we naturally access a large corpus—the body of language we have been exposed to during our lifetimes—to decode the groups of letters or sounds we encounter. The most basic corpus linguistics analysis involves our split-second effort to access the body of language in our heads in our ongoing attempt to decode words or phrases we may be uncertain of. We all do that repeatedly every day.
 [*P59]  The first time we heard a skateboarder described as "so sick," we may have misperceived that description as negative—if not an indication of illness, then at least a general notion of repellence. Oxford English Dictionary online, "sick" (defintitions 1a and 4a(d)). In time we learned to decode the above use of this term in this context. We came to understand that "so sick" in this context was not criticism but high praise. Oxford English Dictionary online, "sick" ("slang (now esp. Skateboarding and Surfing). Excellent, impressive; risky"). Our means of sensing that meaning, moreover, was not a matter of looking the word up in the dictionary (as the word sick itself can mean all of the above, and this new meaning does not yet appear in most dictionaries). It was a matter of accessing the body of language we have encountered to view the meaning of the word in its broader context—the object of the adjective (skateboarder), the broader phrase ("so sick"), and even the demographics of the speaker (millennial).
 [*P60]  Judges have long employed similar methods of decoding the language of the law. To resolve ambiguities in statutes, judges access their memory of the use of uncertain terms in the context in which they have heard them used.12  In so doing they are engaged in corpus linguistics analysis. And no one bats an eye, because this is a natural, accepted method for humans to resolve ambiguities in language.
 [*P61]  It is a small step to utilize a tool to aid our linguistic memory. Judges do this with some frequency as well. Naturally. If judges are entitled to consult the corpus of language in our heads (and how could we not?), we must also be permitted to supplement and check our memory against publicly available sources of language.
 [*P62]  A dictionary, in fact, is a corpus. Its material—definitions of an extensive body of words—is compiled from broader linguistic corpora.13  And some dictionaries include snippets of concordance lines from those corpora, as examples of instances in which a particular sense of a word might be intended. Judges also use dictionaries as a means of this kind of corpus analysis.
 [*P63]  Judges have also looked to databases available in Westlaw or Lexis, or more broadly through an internet search engine, to help us recall how particular words or phrases are commonly used in written or spoken English. We have done so in opinions for  this court.14  The U.S. Supreme Court has also taken this approach.15  And judges have long analyzed the meaning of legal words and phrases by seeing how other courts have used them.16  That too is corpus analysis.
 [*P64]  I would employ this sort of tool in resolving this case. In part II.A. below, I present the results of a Google News search. The results of that search demonstrate that the verb discharge as used in conjunction with a firearm is almost always used in the sense of a single shot (and not the emptying of all of the bullets available in the magazine).
 [*P65]  I would also take this analysis a step further, however. For reasons described below, there are reasons to look beyond Google News to consult an additional tool for understanding the notion of discharge of a weapon as that phrase is commonly used in written or spoken English. In part II.B., I present a parallel analysis employing an online tool for analyzing a large online collection of written and spoken English—the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), available at corpus.byu.edu/coca. The search results from this analysis confirm this same understanding of discharge of a weapon, but with greater transparency and reliability.
A
 [*P66]  A natural place to go for access to a large body of linguistic data is the internet. Most all of us (even judges) are familiar with this source of data, and with the search tools for accessing it. And thoughtful analysis using the results of a common search engine can generate data we may use as an empirical check on our (imperfect) linguistic intuition.17 
 [*P67]  Judges on this court and elsewhere have begun to access this resource as we tackle problems of lexical ambiguity. Over the past few years, members of this court have authored several separate opinions presenting internet search results in support of our construction of ambiguous statutory text.18  More recently, in State v. Canton, 2013 UT 44, 308 P.3d 517, we employed such an approach in an opinion of the court. Our unanimous Canton opinion resolved an ambiguity in a tolling provision for our criminal statutes of limitations, Utah Code section 76-1-304(1).  The critical statutory phrase tolls the statute of limitations during any period in which the defendant is "out of the state." And we resolved a critical ambiguity in that phrase—as to whether it referred to physical absence beyond a state's boundaries, or mere unavailability for legal process—by use of a Google News search.
 [*P68]  In Canton we concluded that "[d]ictionaries [we]re . . . insufficient by themselves to resolve the interpretive task before us." Id. ¶ 20. And we therefore indicated a need to "look else-where to determine the ordinary meaning of the language of the tolling statute." Id. The "elsewhere" was a Google News search, which we employed to assess the "way the full phrase ['out of the state'] is typically used in common parlance." Id. ¶ 26. The results of that search confirmed that "[w]hen the phrase 'out of the state' is used in its full context, it refers to the physical territory of a state, not its political power or influence." Id. ¶ 27.
 [*P69]  We described the search and its results as follows:
This conclusion is based on results of a Google News search, http://news.google.com, considering 150 instances in which the phrase "out of the state" was used in news stories published in May 2013-27 of which involved references to the relationship between a person and the state. Not one of those 27 relevant references use "out of the state" in a manner involving absence of a person from the legal authority or influence of a state. Every single one of them makes unequivocal reference to the physical confines of a state.
Id. ¶ 27 n.6. On the basis of these search results, we concluded that "although Canton's construction" of the Utah tolling provision was "semantically plausible based on dictionary definitions of 'out of' and 'the state,' it cannot be reconciled with the uniform understanding of the extended statutory phrase 'out of the state.'" Id. ¶ 27. Because "[t]hat phrase is not used in the way that Canton construes it," we rejected it as incompatible with the ordinary meaning of the statutory text. Id.
 [*P70]  I would follow the Canton model in this case. Because both sides are able to marshal dictionary definitions in support of their view of discharge, we must reach beyond the dictionary to resolve this case. And, as in Canton, a Google News search confirms the conclusion that the majority adopts but cannot justify on the basis of the dictionary, or etymology, or mere intuition.
 [*P71]  Google is a widely used, well-known search engine. As most people know, this search engine can do more than search the world-wide web. It may also be employed to search an extensive body of published newspaper articles.
 [*P72]  Such a corpus is a reliable resource for assessing the ordinary meaning of a statutory term. Published newspaper articles are a useful body of natural language due to their size.19  The Google News corpus, moreover, is both well-understood by the public (including judges and lawyers) and easily adapted for analysis (in that a search may be time-delimited and the search results may be reviewed in a systematic, transparent way). Unlike a dictionary, moreover, a Google search allows for analysis of phrases—or key words in a particular context—and not just individual words.
 [*P73]  A Google News search confirms the single shot sense of discharge when that term is used in connection with a firearm. On a search conducted on June 4, 2015, the phrase "discharge a fire-arm" generated 43 hits for newspaper articles published between March 1 and June 4, 2015. Fifteen of those hits were inconclusive in terms of the intended sense of "discharge." I omitted those hits from my analysis. Of the remaining 28 articles, none of them clearly support Rasabout's notion of discharge involving emptying all bullets in a gun's magazine.20  And 27 clearly employ the single shot sense of the term.
 [*P74]   The 27 relevant hits linked to articles cited below.21  Each of them conclusively indicates that when we speak of discharging a firearm, we are talking about a single shot, and not a complete emptying of a gun's magazine. In nine of the articles it is clear from the context that only one shot was fired. In two, each discharge is described as a separate event. In ten others, the term discharge is used in close connection with the terms shoot, fire or similar words describing a single firing of a gun. And in the remaining six, the use of discharge simply doesn't make sense grammatically if read as a reference to multiple shots.
 [*P75]  I would employ the above corpus analysis to sustain the conclusion that each single shot is a separate discharge of a weapon under Utah Code section 76-10-508(1)(a). That is the conclusion suggested by my linguistic intuition. But, more transparently, it is also confirmed by an analysis of the use of natural language in current newspaper articles.
B
 [*P76]  Most any analysis of public sources of real-world language, in my view, is better than a judge's take-my-word-for-it assertion  of ordinariness. But not all searches are created equal. A Google News search bears some of the key hallmarks of reliable analysis. It is certainly more transparent and easier to replicate than a judge's intuition.
 [*P77]  Yet a Google News search is hardly unimpeachable.22  The Google algorithm is proprietary and thus not fully transparent. So we cannot tell exactly what factors affect the results of any given search on Google News.23  Another concern goes to the replicability of a given search. My search terms and results are memorialized in the above footnotes. But because the Google algorithm is hidden, and the results of any given search may be affected by factors unknown to (or particularized for) an individual user, there is no guarantee that the same search performed at another time on another computer will generate identical results.24 
 [*P78]  These problems will be heightened—and others added to them—in a broader Google search of the world-wide web (as opposed to the Google News database). A search for relative hit counts is especially problematic. Consider the Seventh Circuit's analysis in United States v. Costello, 666 F.3d 1040, 1044 (7th Cir. 2012). In Costello the court was faced with the question of the scope of the crime of "habor[ing]" an illegal alien under 8 U.S.C. § 1324(a)(1)(A)(iii) (2012). Judge Posner, writing for the court, conducted a Google search to try to resolve an ambiguity—of whether the statute used harbor in the sense of "to give shelter or refuge to" (see Webster's Third New International Dictionary, sense 1a(1)) or "to receive clandestinely and conceal" (id., sense 1a(2)). To Judge Posner's credit, the Costello opinion acknowledged the limits of dictionaries. It noted that "[d]ictionary definitions are . . . acontextual, whereas the meaning of sentences depends critically on context, including all sorts of background understandings." 666 F.3d at 1042. And the court's instincts were generally in line with the tools and methods that I propose. Instead of purporting to resolve the lexical ambiguity by resort to a dictionary, Judge Posner sought to do so by means of a corpus analysis of the world-wide-web—via a Google search.
 [*P79]  Yet Judge Posner's search highlights some deficiencies in standard Google internet searches. His search, as described in the Costello opinion, was as follows:
A Google Search . . . of several terms in which the word "harboring" appears—a search based on the supposition that the number of hits per term is a rough index of the frequency of its use—reveals the following:
"harboring fugitives": 50,800 hits
"harboring enemies": 4,730 hits
"harboring refugees": 4,820 hits
"harboring victims": 114 hits
"harboring flood victims": 0 hits
"harboring victims of disasters": 0 hits
"harboring victims of persecution": 0 hits
"harboring guests": 184 hits
"harboring friends": 256 hits (but some involve harboring Quakers—"Friends," viewed in colonial New England as dangerous heretics)
"harboring Quakers": 3,870 hits
"harboring Jews": 19,100 hits25 
 [*P80]  From these results, the Costello opinion concludes that "[i]t is apparent . . . that 'harboring,' as the word is actually used, has a connotation—which 'sheltering,' and a fortiori 'giving a person a place to stay'—does not, of deliberately safeguarding members of a specified group from the authorities, whether through concealment, movement to  a safe location, or physical protection."26  And on that basis the court reversed the conviction under review, concluding that there was no evidence to support the conclusion that Costello had "harbored" her boyfriend, an illegal alien, in the sense of seeking to conceal him from the authorities.
 [*P81]  The Costello opinion is a step in the right direction. But it also highlights some deficiencies of Google web searches as a basis for assessing ordinary meaning. The Costello analysis is vulnerable for reasons noted above—that hit counts are unreliable because the Google algorithm is unknown, as underscored by the fact that different searches at different times on different computers may reveal very different results.27 
 [*P82]  But the Costello approach is also vulnerable to other attacks. One is that Judge Posner's choice of search terms seems arbitrary. To assess the ordinary meaning of harbor, he searches only the present participle form of the verb (harboring). And he chooses objects of the verb (fugitives, enemies, refugees, flood victims, victims of disasters, victims of persecution, guests, friends, Quakers, and Jews) on grounds that are not stated. (Curiously, the statutory object—alien—is not included.)
 [*P83]  These search terms are understandable. But they are somewhat arbitrary (presumably based on Posner's linguistic intuition), and could easily skew the results. The use of intuition is, again, understandable. But if the goal of this type of analysis is to check the judge's intuition, this move undermines a key benefit of the approach.
 [*P84]  These problems can be addressed by means of a more transparent, reliable search tool. The tool that I would employ is one developed by a renowned corpus linguist, Professor Mark Davies. This corpus is known as the Corpus of Contemporary American Usage (COCA). See Mark Davies, The Corpus of Contemporary American English: 410+ million words, 1990-present, http://corpus.byu.edu/coca (2008-). COCA is "the largest freely-available corpus of English, and the only large and balanced corpus of American English. . . . The corpus contains more than 410 million words of text and is equally divided among spoken, fiction, popular magazines, newspapers, and academic texts." Id.
 [*P85]  Like Google or Westlaw, the COCA search engine is easy to use. But unlike Google, and to a lesser extent Westlaw, COCA is also completely transparent, and it generates search results that are easily replicable. COCA, moreover, avoids the shortcomings of a Google web search as noted above, and illustrated in the Costello opinion. With the COCA search engine, there is no need for a user to think up her own objects of the verb harbor. COCA allows the user to generate a list of the most common words used near harbor. Significantly, moreover, the user can search only for the verb forms of harbor.28  So the COCA user can generate the most common nouns near harbor as a verb, instead of guessing at what they might be. That list of collocates (essentially, "word neighbors") in itself will give some insight into the ordinary meaning of harbor.
 [*P86]  COCA also allows the user to do more than get a simple "hit count." A COCA search yields a display of each use of harbor, exactly like Google or Westlaw, in the context of each of its most common word neighbors. By examining each instance of harbor with its common word neighbors, we can assess the frequency of each of the attested meanings of the verb.
 [*P87]  COCA also facilitates transparency and replicability. A search performed on the COCA site can be saved and linked for future reference, allowing a party, counsel, or interested commentator to review the search results and assess the court's analysis.
 [*P88]  I would accordingly utilize a COCA search to analyze the meaning of discharge of a firearm. My search29  identified 86  instances30  of the verb discharge within five words of the nouns fire-arm, firearms, gun, and weapon. By examining the instances of discharge in connection with these nearby nouns, I confirmed that the single shot sense of this verb is overwhelmingly the ordinary sense of the term in this context.
 [*P89]  Twelve of the 81 hits in the COCA search clearly linked discharge to a single bullet. In 16 other hits, the discharge was accidental. I deemed those hits as also consistent with the single shot sense of discharge, as it seems highly unlikely if not impossible that an accidental trigger-pull could result in a release of all of the bullets in a gun's magazine. Fifteen other hits were a bit more ambiguous; but on closer examination, the discharge in question seemed to imply a single shot (based on the nature of the weapon, the circumstance of the discharge, or description of the resulting damage).
 [*P90]  In 36 other instances I concluded that there was insufficient detail to indicate whether the discharge at issue had reference to a single shot or to the emptying of a magazine. One additional hit was rejected as irrelevant (involving a patient being discharged from a hospital, which happened to occur within five words of the word gun).
 [*P91]  In all, I found only one instance of discharge of a weapon that seemed consistent with the firing of multiple shots. Based on the context of this usage, it seemed likely that the discharge in question referred to a stream or burst of bullets instead of a single shot.
 [*P92]  This COCA search accordingly confirms our linguistic intuition and is consistent with the Google News analysis above. It indicates that discharge of a weapon is used overwhelmingly in the single shot sense. Of 81 hits, (44 that were conclusive and relevant) only one seems consistent with Rasabout's notion of a burst of bullets (and even then, there is no basis for concluding that the burst involved emptying the entire contents of a gun's magazine). Thus, almost every conclusive instance of discharge of a weapon involves a single shot.
 [*P93]  This provides strong confirmation of the basis of our holding in this case. And it does so on the basis of a transparent database that is publicly available, created by linguists, and subject to replication by anyone seeking to confirm (or reject) my analysis.
III
 [*P94]  Novel tools for tackling old problems naturally prompt skepticism. That reaction is all the more predictable when the new tool implicates unfamiliar technology.
 [*P95]  For decades lawyers used paper digests and other hardcopy compilations to find judicial opinions to support their arguments. When computer-searchable databases of opinions were first introduced, some were dubious. For years some even predicted that computer-based research would undermine the lawyer's craft.31  Not many of us think that way now. The addition of the tool of computer-based research is widely viewed as an enhancement, particularly when used in combination with other, traditional methods.
 [*P96]  The point is not that corpus linguistic analysis is the next Westlaw or Lexis. Its utility is obviously more narrow. But the analogy is apt in that the tool I'm proposing would not replace but add to existing methods, and it would do so in a manner that takes advantage of technology available to us in the computer age.
 [*P97]  That said, I accept many of the points raised by Chief Justice Durrant in his concurrence.  I too see a need to proceed with caution, supra ¶ 39, and to "weigh the potential usefulness" of corpus analysis "against its potential cost." Supra ¶ 38. And I certainly agree that this analysis "would be best employed by us, or by other judges, . . . after the parties have raised it and argued it." Supra ¶ 37. That is true for anything we do. We depend on the adversary process. Our opinions are better when adversary briefing is complete and in-depth.
 [*P98]  Yet I do not see these as barriers for employing corpus analysis in this case. The parties have squarely presented the issue of the meaning of discharge of a weapon for our resolution, and they have given their best shot at offering linguistic analysis (using dictionaries and the lawyers' own linguistic intuition) on that issue. To some extent all members of the court have gone beyond the parties' briefing in deciding that issue. It is no affront to the adversary system for us to do that, as it is not just inevitable but entirely appropriate. (No one thinks that a careful judge should suspend independent analysis.) And it adds mostly transparency to extend our discussion to encompass the corpus analysis set forth in my opinion.32 
 [*P99]  I concede that the Google News and COCA tools that I have employed will be unfamiliar to many. But it is not the case that my "rationale" is "different in kind from any argument made by the parties," or even from analysis presented by my colleagues. Supra ¶ 17. Every member of this court is addressing the same issue,33  and we all are engaged in the same basic analysis—of seeking the ordinary sense of discharge when that term is used in connection with a firearm. We can do that using our intuition and the corpus-based information compiled in a dictionary (as my colleagues do), or we can extend the analysis (as I have) to look at examples of real-world language compiled by a Google News or COCA search. Neither approach is "subject to scientific review." Supra ¶ 16. And neither yields to Mr. Rasabout "a reasonable opportunity to present a different perspective," supra ¶ 17, if by that we mean the chance to engage with us at the opinion-writing stage to respond to our arguments.
 [*P100]  Parties never have that opportunity, however. And they have no more opportunity to do that with regard to the majority's approach than with mine. The majority's insistence that discharge means shoot in this context is based on the majority judges' linguistic intuition—informed, no doubt, by the body of language that they have encountered during their lifetime. Certainly that analysis is not "subject to scientific review," much less to pushback from Mr. Rasabout.34 
 [*P101]  The majority's remaining concerns are a bit more substantial, or at least deserving of a more fulsome response. In the paragraphs below, I respond to the court's charges (a) that corpus analysis is a "scientific field of study" that is the domain of an expert witness and not a generalist judge, supra ¶¶ 18-19; (b) that judges lack the expertise necessary to conduct reliable corpus analysis, supra ¶¶ 19-21; (c) that the introduction of corpus analysis will "place an unbearable burden" on the judicial system by requiring "dueling linguistics experts" "in every case," supra ¶ 19; (d) that my approach ignores corpus analysis of "the text of the Utah Code," supra ¶ 21, and suggests that "ordinary meaning is the exclusive tool available to us in our effort to effectuate legislative intent," supra ¶ 10 n.16; and (e) that  my corpus analysis is problematic in that it discards a certain number of hits "as having 'insufficient detail'" to be conclusive, supra ¶ 21.
A
 [*P102]  The legal or ethical propriety of "sua sponte" corpus analysis by a judge is a valid question. See supra ¶ 17. On a range of scientific matters, we think of research or analysis as the domain of experts. And we rightly eschew a judge's independent attempts at his own scientific "findings." Supra ¶ 20. Such analysis, in fact, would be a breach of judicial ethics.
 [*P103]  In Utah, our Code of Judicial Conduct provides that "[a] judge shall not investigate facts in a matter independently, and shall consider only the evidence presented and any facts that may properly be judicially noticed." Utah R. J. Admin. Code Canon 2, Rule 2.9(C). So the majority would be right to reject my corpus analysis if it were a matter of independent factual investigation. That is usually what is involved in the "scientific field[s] of study" cited by the court. Supra ¶ 18. And on such questions, it would undoubtedly be improper for us to "conduct scientific research" or to "contrive of interesting research projects that require expertise in fields in which we have no training." Supra ¶ 18.
 [*P104]  But that is not at all what I am engaged in. Independent investigation is foreclosed only as to "facts," not law. That is significant. Judicial analysis of the meaning of language, using corpus analysis or anything else, is aimed at interpreting the law. That is the judge's role. In performing the core function of deciding what the law is or should be, we cannot properly be restricted from consulting sources that inform our understanding.35 
 [*P105]  The operative rule makes that abundantly clear. It opens the door to the consideration of "facts that may properly be judicially noticed." Utah R. J. Admin. Code Canon 2, Rule 2.9(C). To the extent the analysis presented above encompasses "facts" (e.g., as to the way the verb discharge is typically used in our language in connection with the noun firearm or its synonyms), moreover, our law makes clear that we are free to consider them as a matter of judicial notice. Otherwise my colleagues' opinions also cross the line, as they also consider evidence not presented in the briefs regarding the ordinary meaning of discharge. A judge's judicial notice power is addressed by rule 201 of our rules of evidence. That rule indicates that the limitations in the rule are addressed to "an adjudicative fact only, not a legislative fact." Utah R. Evid. 201(a). And the advisory committee note explains the distinction. It says that "[s]ince legislative facts are matters that go to the policy of a rule of law as distinct from the true facts that are used in the adjudication of a controversy they are not appropriate for a rule of evidence and best left to the law-making considerations by appellate and trial courts." Utah R. Evid. 201 advisory committee's note. Thus, this type of analysis is an appropriate method of judicial analysis because it goes to "the policy of a rule of law as distinct from the true facts that are used in the adjudication of a controversy."36  Id.
 [*P106]   On reflection, moreover, this must be correct. A contrary conclusion would call into question a wide range of opinions of this court and many others. If we were foreclosed from considering outside material that informs our resolution of open questions of law, we would be barred from engaging in historical analysis relevant to a question of original meaning of a provision of the constitution, or from considering social science literature in resolving a difficult question under the common law. Linguistic analysis is no different; to the extent we charge our judges with resolving ambiguities in language, we cannot (and do not) reasonably restrict their ability to do so on a well-informed basis—even on grounds not presented by the parties, and not within the domain of judges' professional training. Such a restriction, after all, would not just foreclose corpus analysis; it would also prevent us from consulting a dictionary or our own experience with language.
B
 [*P107]  It is likewise fair to question our ability to perform corpus analysis properly. Most judges are generalists. And few if any have specialized training in corpus linguistics. So I concede the point that judges will not bring to bear the kind of training possessed by "linguistics experts" retained by the parties. Supra ¶ 19.
 [*P108]  But that, respectfully, is not the point. We judges are experts on one thing—interpreting the law. And the fact that enterprise may implicate disciplines or fields of study on which we lack expertise is no reason to raise the white flag. It is reason to summon all our faculties as best we can, and to overcome any weaknesses we may possess. This is not a matter of dreaming up "interesting research projects." Supra ¶ 18. It is a matter of doing our job—of doing all we can to understand and implement the will of the legislature as expressed in the terms of its statutes, and to convey our grounds for doing so in a written opinion.
 [*P109]  That job isn't always easy. It involves not just linguistic analysis but also historical inquiry—e.g., in finding original meaning. Few of us have training in historical research. It may even be said that lawyers and judges "are for the most part extremely bad historians," and may "make up an imaginary history and use curiously unhistorical methods."37  Yet judges of all stripes engage in historical analysis, particularly in their interpretation of the constitution. So the response to our lack of historical training is not to back away from the enterprise; it is to arm ourselves with the tools necessary to do the best history we can.
 [*P110]  We face a parallel problem when it comes to our analysis of the meaning of language. When it comes to training or experience in methods of linguistic analysis, most of us lack specialized training. So there is certainly a risk, to paraphrase Max Radin, of judges using curiously unscientific linguistic methods.
 [*P111]  But the proper response to this risk is not the abandonment of the enterprise of linguistic analysis. That enterprise is an integral element of judging. Judges cannot do their job without assessing the ordinary meaning of words. So the question is not whether to engage in linguistic analysis; it is whether to do so with the aid of—instead of in open ignorance of or rebellion to—modern tools developed to facilitate that analysis.
 [*P112]  We could continue to judge the ordinary meaning of words based on intuition, aided by the dictionary. But those tools are problematic, for reasons explained above. And the impact of a judge's mere gut intuition is entirely opaque. So it is our current methodology and tools that involve bad linguistics produced by unscientific methods. If the concern is reliability, the proper response is to embrace—and not abandon—corpus-based analysis.
 [*P113]   To do so well, we judges must seek to understand this field better. We are not experts. At least I am not; I do not possess a complete understanding of the methodologies at our disposal. But I am convinced that the approach employed above is essential to a more reliable, transparent fulfillment of this judicial task.
 [*P114]  Corpus analysis, in all events, is not rocket science. At some level we all do it intuitively in our minds. It's a small leap to check our intuition against examples of real-world language revealed by a Google-or COCA-based38  search of a body of written English. We don't need much expertise to do that well.39 
 [*P115]  Corpus analysis is like math—at one level it's something basic that everyone does; at another level it's something complicated that only "experts" can do. The type of corpus analysis I am doing—and advocating—is the former. I just think we should be using a calculator instead of doing it in our heads.
 [*P116]  As to historical analysis, Justice Antonin Scalia and his co-author Bryan Garner have aptly repudiated the charge that "'no one can reconstruct original understanding precisely'" with a powerful reminder of the judicial task: "Our charge is to try."40  The same can be said of linguistic analysis. It may not be possible to resolve questions of ordinary meaning with absolute certainty. But we must try. And in so doing we must bring to bear the methods and tools developed in the 21st Century to better understand the meaning of language for this crucial element of judging.
C
 [*P117]  I see no reason to expect that the introduction of corpus analysis in judging ordinary meaning will require "dueling linguistics experts" "in every . . . case" where both sides present plausible dictionary definitions to support their position. Supra ¶ 19. First, as noted, this isn't rocket science. Just as lawyers in constitutional litigation have learned to present historical analysis of original meaning, counsel in statutory cases can compile Google-or COCA-based examples of the use of statutory phrases in real-world written English. To do this well, lawyers will have to inform themselves a bit in basic linguistic methodology. But lawyers are crafty and ingenious. They learn new methods and tools all the time. I see no barrier to their presentation of helpful analysis in this field.
 [*P118]  Perhaps there will be an occasional case where linguistics expertise could be useful, and where a party may wish to retain an expert. But even if an expert were retained in every case in which corpus analysis were determinative, we would hardly see experts in "every . . . case" in which the parties proffer dueling dictionary definitions. Again the majority misunderstands my approach. Corpus analysis is something of a last resort. It comes into play only if we find that the legislature is not using words in some specialized sense, and only if we cannot reject one of the parties' definitions based on the structure or context of the statute. See supra ¶¶ 43-44. Corpus analysis comes in, in other words, as something of a tie-breaker where we find no better way of resolving the  matter. In my five years on this court, I have employed such analysis only a very few times.41  In the many other statutory cases that come before us, I have disposed of the matter using more traditional tools of interpretation.
 [*P119]  The "unbearable burden" imagined by the majority, supra ¶ 19, is a strawman. Lawyers can easily learn to present corpus analysis in the vast run of cases that implicate this approach, and the need for experts will at most be very occasional.
D
 [*P120]  The majority's next criticisms of my corpus analysis—that it ignores consideration of "the text of the Utah Code," supra ¶ 21, and suggests that "ordinary meaning is the exclusive tool available to us in our effort to effectuate legislative intent," supra ¶ 10 n.16—are based on misconceptions. First, a corpus analysis of the "text of the Utah Code" would make sense if we were thinking of discharge of a firearm as a legal term of art. In that case I would agree wholeheartedly with the notion of searching for uses of the statutory language to "identify . . . idiosyncrasies" in the way this term is used in the "rule of law in this state." Supra ¶ 21. But no one (certainly not the majority) has proffered the view that discharge is a legal term of art subject to specialized meaning in the law. Everyone agrees that this term is being used in its ordinary sense. So the critique for the lack of this kind of analysis is puzzling.
 [*P121]  Second, I am not at all seeking to limit the enterprise of statutory interpretation to a search for "ordinary meaning" in all cases. None of my (unanimous) opinions string-cited dismissively by the majority "suggest that ordinary meaning is the exclusive tool available to us in our effort to effectuate legislative intent." Supra ¶ 10 n.16 (citing, in reference to this criticism, Barneck v. Utah Dep't of Transp., 2015 UT 50, ¶ 28, 353 P.3d 140, P.3d ; State v. Bagnes, 2014 UT 4, ¶ 13, 322 P.3d 719; Hi-Country Prop. Rights Grp. v. Emmer, 2013 UT 33, ¶ 18, 304 P.3d 851; State v. Canton, 2013 UT 44, ¶¶ 12-13, 308 P.3d 517; Olsen v. Eagle Mountain City, 2011 UT 10, ¶ 9, 248 P.3d 465). All of these opinions are in line with the approach I have outlined here—of asking first about specialized meaning, looking next for structural or contextual grounds for eliminating one of the parties' definitions, and resorting to ordinary meaning only at the end of the interpretive road. None proposed a search for ordinary meaning as "the only consideration" in statutory interpretation. See also supra ¶ 43 n.1.
 [*P122]  I have no quarrel, of course, with the goal of "giv[ing] effect to the intent of the Legislature." Supra ¶ 10. That is the aim of any thoughtful jurist on a matter of statutory interpretation. And it is the enterprise that we are all engaged in here.
 [*P123]  Sometimes we speak of a difference in the theory or methodology for getting there. There is a purported division—sometimes acknowledged in judicial opinions, and more often in law journals—between judges who approach matters of interpretation from the standpoint of "purposivism" and those who see their enterprise as a matter of "textualism."42  But these "label[s] tend[] toward caricature";43  "textualism and purposivism . . . share more conceptual common ground than" is "sometimes emphasized."44  "[N]o 'textualist' favors isolating statutory language from its surrounding context, and no critic of textualism believes that statutory text is unimportant."45  So the overlap is significant. Both approaches look for legislative intent, both seek to find it in the statutory text, and both acknowledge the relevance of context in interpreting the text.
 [*P124]  In my opinions on statutory interpretation, I tend to speak of our role in interpreting  the text of the statute, as that is what was voted on and signed into law by the legislature and the governor.46  This is a basic premise of textualism. But my approach to interpretation is founded on the notion of legislative supremacy and is aimed at finding legislative intent. And it acknowledges the need to consider context—and even a carefully informed sense of legislative purpose—in resolving ambiguities in statutory language.47  To a large extent this is just a flipside of modern purposivism.48 
 [*P125]  I have long understood my colleagues on the court to share this essential view of our role. We may occasionally use different labels to describe our aims, but it has always seemed to me that we are engaged in the same essential function.49  Thus, I have not viewed our court's opinions as embracing "old-school" purposivism—of a prerogative of "adjust[ing] the enacted text to capture what [the legislature] would have intended" if it had thought about the issue before the court more carefully.50  My colleagues' purposivism, as I understand it, is one that looks to statutory language to find legislative intent, and is bound by the meaning of those words as we interpret them.
 [*P126]  I am comfortable that this is a close cousin to the textualist approach that I have taken. So I have joined opinions authored by my colleagues even though they do not  speak in explicitly textualist terms. And my colleagues have joined my opinions even though they are framed in textualist terms51  (and may even include corpus analysis52 ).
 [*P127]  My textualism has never been about finding "ordinary meaning" as the "exclusive tool available to us in our effort to effectuate legislative intent." Supra ¶ 10 n.16. The court's critique along those lines is simply mistaken. In this case I'm asking the exact same question the court is asking; I'm just resorting to an additional tool for answering it.
 [*P128]  The tool I employ (COCA) and the methodology I use (corpus analysis), moreover, are not just for textualists. They are for anyone who is interested in analyzing text. All judges—textualists and purposivists and others—focus on the meaning of statutory language. The question is how to do so—whether to stick with using our intuition and dictionaries only, or whether to check our intuition by searching a database of language. I see more upside than downside to taking that step.
E
 [*P129]  I welcome focused critiques of the corpus analyses I have presented as grounds for my decision. A main point of my approach, after all, is to facilitate transparency and discourse. But the majority's criticism of my exclusion of 36 "inconclusive" hits from my COCA analysis is puzzling, as is its challenge to the "statisitical[] significan[ce]" of my conclusions. Supra ¶ 21. The decision to exclude 36 of the hits in the COCA analysis is straight-forward. I didn't "ignore" them. Supra ¶ 21. I found "insufficient detail to indicate whether the discharge at issue had reference to a single shot or to the emptying of a magazine." Supra ¶ 90.
 [*P130]  I am unsure of the majority's discomfort with that decision. If it thinks the 36 hits that I excluded cut against my conclusion, it should say so. The sentences I analyzed are available to the majority at the link I provided, so the majority could easily have examined those 36 hits I left out to determine whether I did so appropriately. Absent a specific critique, I will simply stand by the above analysis.
 [*P131]  The same goes for the "interpretive assumption[s]" that led to my treatment of other hits. See supra ¶ 21. The COCA data are preserved and available for review. Chief Justice Durrant apparently reviewed them and was satisfied with my conclusions. See supra ¶ 37 n.10 (indicating that he "found no . . . flaws" in his "own examination" of my COCA analysis). The majority is free to do the same. If it disagrees with my "interpretive assumption[s]" or my exclusion of inconclusive hits it should offer reasons for so concluding.
 [*P132]  I am unsure what the majority is looking for in terms of statistical significance. I found only one sole instance of discharge of a firearm that had arguable reference to multiple bullets. That was out of 81 hits, or 44 hits after excluding those that were inconclusive or irrelevant. That is statistically significant under any measure.53 
 [*P133]   In all events, the majority's criticisms again are a boomerang for its position. If the concern is for statistical significance, you can't get more insignificant than a data point of one—particularly if the data point is not unbiased. The problem with the majority's analysis, at its core, is that it is rooted in the subjective linguistic intuition of an individual judge (or a panel of them). The aspiration for statistical significance is a good one, but that goal is hardly advanced by the insistence on a judicial prerogative of resolving ambiguity based on pure intuition without resort to objective means for testing it.
IV
 [*P134]  The resolution of ambiguities in legal language is one of the most important of all judicial tasks. It is also one of the most opaque; for that reason it is fraught with the potential for bias and error. We should do what we can to minimize those risks. The approach I have outlined is a step in that direction.

 

