
 [*P33]  The majority reverses the district court's decision suppressing evidence secured under a search warrant signed by a magistrate and executed by the police. It does so on the ground that there was a substantial basis for the magistrate's determination that there was probable cause for issuance of the warrant in question. And for that reason the court stops short of reaching broader constitutional questions presented by this case.
 [*P34]  I concur in the majority opinion. I am persuaded by the Chief Justice's analysis of the grounds for finding probable cause sufficient to justify the issuance of the warrant in this case. See supra ¶¶ 18-20.
 [*P35]  I write separately, however, to articulate an alternative ground for reversal. That ground was briefed by the parties and squarely presented for our decision. It concerns the appropriate remedy for a violation of the search and seizure provision of the Utah Constitution—by way of an exclusionary rule or some other remedy.
 [*P36]  The majority is right to say that its decision on the probable cause issue makes it unnecessary for us to reach the question of the proper remedy for an unconstitutional search. But appellate courts retain the discretion to reach alternative grounds for decision. And I would reach this question here for reasons set forth in part in my opinion in State v. Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶¶ 27-69, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring), and elaborated further below.
 [*P37]  I would hold that article I, section 14 of the Utah Constitution does not require the imposition of an exclusionary remedy for a violation of this provision. Instead I would conclude that this clause does not speak to the required remedy, but leaves that matter to be resolved and adapted by policymaking branches of government over time. In so doing I would repudiate the reasoning contained in our contrary precedents, such as State v. Larocco, 794 P.2d 460 (Utah 1990), and State v. Thompson, 810 P.2d 415 (Utah 1991). These cases are entitled to a presumption of correctness under our doctrine of stare decisis. See Eldridge v. Johndrow, 2015 UT 21, ¶¶ 21-22, 345 P.3d 553. But in my view their analysis is ripe for repudiation because it is not firmly rooted in our law, is clearly incorrect as a matter of original  meaning, and does not sustain significant reliance interests. See id. ¶ 22 (identifying factors relevant to the decision whether to overrule precedent).
I
 [*P38]  The Walker case was similar to this one in several respects. The briefing in that case, as here, raised the question of whether article I, section 14 enshrines an exclusionary remedy for a violation of the state guarantee against unreasonable searches and seizures. And, as in this case, we stopped short of reaching that issue because we found probable cause sufficient to sustain the reasonableness of the search in question. See Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶¶ 13-18, 267 P.3d 210.
 [*P39]  In the Walker case I wrote separately to "articulate an alternative ground for affirmance." Id. ¶ 28 (Lee, J., concurring). I suggested, specifically, that "Utah's constitution as originally understood did not contemplate the remedy of exclusion in the event of an illegal search or seizure." Id. I presented historical evidence cited in the briefs in that case that seemed to me to undermine the notion of an exclusionary remedy as mandated by the Utah Constitution. See id. ¶¶ 47-58. And I advocated overruling our decisions in State v. Larocco, 794 P.2d 460 (1990), and State v. Thompson, 810 P.2d 415 (Utah 1991), on the ground that they "enshrine[d] this sweeping remedy without any consideration of the original meaning of the constitutional provision in question." Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶ 28, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring). I also suggested that it was important for us to address this question soon because the stare decisis effect of Larocco and Thompson could become cemented over time—making it difficult for us to overturn them even if we decided they were wrongly decided. See id. ¶¶ 59-60 (asserting that "[w]e are not yet at the stage where the Thompson exclusionary rule is beyond our reconsideration," but that in time "a defendant whose section rights are infringed could plausibly contend that he reasonably relied on the availability of an exclusionary rule in Utah constitutional law").
 [*P40]  The briefing in this case has confirmed the principles set forth in my Walker opinion while also highlighting an aspect of the issue that I did not fully explore there. I continue to maintain that (a) "the text and history of article I, section 14" do not "incorporate the sweeping remedy of an exclusionary rule" as a requirement of state constitutional law, id. ¶¶ 47-58; (b) our decisions in Larocco and Thompson endorsed an exclusionary remedy without analyzing the text or history of article I, section 14, id. ¶¶ 40-46; and (c) "there is little ground for an argument that the [exclusionary] rule is so settled that it is beyond reconsideration on reliance grounds," id. ¶ 60. And for these reasons, as in Walker, I would urge this court to "reconsider" the idea of an exclusionary rule as a matter of state constitutional law. Id.
 [*P41]  I would do so here. I would address the remedy question that was briefed and argued to us in this case and resolve it as an alternative basis for our decision.
A
 [*P42]  In my concurrence in Walker I observed that the constitution "says nothing about an exclusionary—or any other—remedy for the violation of" article I, section 14. Id. ¶ 47 (emphasis added); Spackman ex rel. Spackman v. Bd. of Educ. of Box Elder Cty. Sch. Dist., 2000 UT 87, ¶ 20, 16 P.3d 533 ("aside from the Takings Clause, there is no textual constitutional right to damages for one who suffers a constitutional tort").20  Yet I also noted that "a citizen wronged by an illegal search" in the late nineteenth century "could sue the wrongdoers for the tort of trespass" and recover damages. Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶ 49, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring). And I implied that a damages award is  the remedy contemplated by the text and history of article I, section 14 of the Utah Constitution.
 [*P43]  The briefing in this case, however, identified grounds for skepticism of the proposition that a damages remedy is the remedy the Utah Constitution requires. Such a remedy was generally available at the time of the framing of the Utah Constitution.21  But "[t]he absence of any textual reference to a [damages] remedy shifts the focus to the historical context of this provision." Id. ¶ 48.
 [*P44]  The relevant context, in my view, includes a general premise about the law of remedies—which is that the selection and crafting of an appropriate remedy has long been thought to be the province of the common law. See, e.g., Spackman, 2000 UT 87, ¶¶ 20-21, 24-25, 16 P.3d 533 ("[A] Utah court's ability to award damages for violation of a self-executing constitutional provision rests on the common law."). Sometimes the common law is overtaken by the legislature, through the legislative prescription of a remedy. See, e.g., Helf v. Chevron U.S.A., Inc., 2009 UT 11, ¶¶ 16-17, 203 P.3d 962 (noting that the Workers Compensation Act creates a remedial scheme "[i]n place of common law remedies"). That is the legislature's prerogative. But the general point is that the law of remedies has long been understood to be subject to adaptation and evolution over time. Because the constitution does not speak to the remedy for an unreasonable search or seizure, moreover, it seems sensible to read article I, section 14 as requiring a remedy sufficient to protect the rights of Utah citizens but leaving the selection of the appropriate remedy—or remedies—up to common-law evolution. Cf. Berry ex rel. Berry v. Beech Aircraft Corp., 717 P.2d 670, 676 (Utah 1985) ("[N]either the due process nor the open courts provision constitutionalizes the common law or otherwise freezes the law governing private rights and remedies as of the time of statehood.").
 [*P45]  The remedy of exclusion was introduced into our Utah system as a matter of federal constitutional law by Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 81 S. Ct. 1684, 6 L. Ed. 2d 1081, 86 Ohio Law Abs. 513 (1961). Thereafter we have accepted that remedy as one appropriate to redress violations of the state constitution.
 [*P46]  But that premise is ripe for reconsideration. If the Utah Constitution does not speak to the appropriate remedy, but leaves that question up to the common law (or legislative adjustment), then we should open the door to adaptation of the remedy or remedies available for unreasonable searches or seizures. By improperly constitutionalizing the exclusionary rule, this court has cut off the ability of policymakers, including this court, from evaluating and developing effective and innovative remedies.
B
 [*P47]  I would open that door here. As an alternative basis for reversal, I would interpret the Utah Constitution to prohibit unreasonable searches and seizures but to leave open the question of the appropriate remedy.
 [*P48]  Under this approach, we would accept the existing framework of an exclusionary rule (subject to exceptions) as a matter of common law. But we would clarify that this remedy is not a constitutional mandate. And that regime would leave the door open to ongoing adjustment by this court or the legislature going forward. See Spackman, 2000 UT 87, ¶ 24, 16 P.3d 533 ("In general, the legislative branch has the authority, and in many cases is better suited, to establish appropriate remedies for individual injuries," so the courts should "use their common law remedial power cautiously"). This would allow policymakers to determine whether the exclusionary rule is the most effective remedy to protect the rights of Utah citizens.
 [*P49]  A move in that direction could address concerns about the current state of search and seizure law. There is an irony in our modern search and seizure law: Because the  sole remedy for an unlawful search or seizure is exclusion of evidence, the protections of the constitution are reserved for those found in possession of illegal contraband; the purely innocent are left without an effective remedy.22 
 [*P50]  There is a further downside to the exclusionary rule: It imposes societal costs unnecessary to the goal of remedying the effects of the unlawful search. Those disproportionate external costs distort the law of search and seizure in ways that further undermine its full protection.23  And this problem has led to a patchwork of exceptions to the exclusionary rule—exceptions that are often ill-defined and difficult to predict,24  and that effectively remove the protections supposedly guaranteed by our federal and state constitutions.
 [*P51]  The approach suggested here could avoid these problems. A remedial regime that includes a damages award would have the important virtue of extending protection against unreasonable search and seizure to all members of the public, not just those found in possession of illegal contraband. And it would allow us to reform a body of law that is riddled by a set of contradictory exceptions that contribute more confusion than clarity.
 [*P52]  The exclusionary rule is both under- and over-inclusive. Its under-inclusiveness lies in its failure to provide a remedy for any but those who are found in possession of contraband. Its over-inclusiveness is in affording relief that goes well beyond that necessary to restore an injured party to his "rightful position"—the position he would have been in but for the infringement of his constitutional rights. Both features are troubling. The former means that some of our citizens have no effective means of securing their right against unreasonable search and seizure. And the latter is also troubling, because the exclusionary rule "almost always requires courts to ignore reliable, trustworthy evidence bearing on guilt or innocence." Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229, 237, 131 S. Ct. 2419, 180 L. Ed. 2d 285 (2011). In fact, "its bottom-line effect, in many cases, is to suppress the truth and set the criminal loose in the community without punishment." Id.
 [*P53]  We can avoid these problems by returning to first principles. The constitution is not an omnibus repository of answers to society's most difficult problems. When we  think of it in that way, we thwart policymakers' ability to exercise the flexibility necessary to make ongoing adjustments addressing complex problems.25  That is certainly true here. By constitutionalizing a remedy not enshrined in the constitution we have interrupted the normal evolutionary processes of the law—the means of judicial or legislative adaptation of the remedies available for unreasonable searches and seizures.
 [*P54]  I would reopen the judicial and legislative dialogue on this important issue. I would conclude that the Utah Constitution does not prescribe an exclusionary remedy for an infringement of the freedom from unreasonable search and seizure. And I would thereby invite our judges and legislators to look for creative ways to correct for the under- and over-inclusiveness problems introduced by the exclusionary rule—ways to fully protect Utah citizens from illegal government intrusions.26 
II
 [*P55]  My colleagues' opposition to my approach seems rooted in principles of constitutional avoidance and stare decisis. See supra ¶¶ 23-25, 31-32. I endorse both of those principles and respect my colleagues' views on how to apply them here. But I believe that established doctrines of constitutional avoidance and stare decisis leave ample room for the decision that I advocate.
A
 [*P56]  The principle of constitutional avoidance is rooted in our longstanding commitment to judicial humility. See State v. DeJesus, 2017 UT 22, ¶ 33, 395 P.3d 111. Our courts are reluctant to reach out to decide new questions of constitutional law because we recognize that such decisions can become fixed in relative stone: A constitutional decision is insulated from review or reconsideration by the political branches of our government.27 
 [*P57]  For this and other reasons our courts have long acknowledged the "gravity and delicacy" of constitutional questions. Ashwander v. Tenn. Valley Auth., 297 U.S. 288, 346-47, 56 S. Ct. 466, 80 L. Ed. 688 (1936). And we generally decline to pass on them when another ground is available because we recognize that further percolation and analysis is likely to enhance the quality of our decisionmaking.28 
 [*P58]   That said, the principle of constitutional avoidance is not a hard and fast rule. It is a presumption. Courts retain the discretion to decide any and all issues presented for review.29  And in my view the presumption of avoidance is rebutted here.30 
 [*P59]  In an ordinary case I would not tread into new constitutional territory when an alternative ground for decision is available. But this is not an ordinary case. And this is not really new constitutional territory.
 [*P60]  Our decisions have already entered this constitutional space in establishing an exclusionary remedy for violations of the Utah search and seizure clause. Yet that precedent leaves litigants and lower courts in the dark on the practical implications of our precedent for disputed cases. The ultimate effect of the exclusionary rule is dictated by the application or availability of any of a number of "exceptions" established in the case law. See State v. Worwood, 2007 UT 47, ¶¶ 43-44, 164 P.3d 397 (describing the independent source, inevitable discovery, and attenuation exceptions). And our courts have not yet decided whether or to what extent to embrace the exceptions endorsed by the United States Supreme Court.
 [*P61]  This was the key constitutional question presented in this case. The district court rejected the availability of the "good faith" exception to the exclusionary rule established in United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 104 S. Ct. 3405, 82 L. Ed. 2d 677 (1984). And the parties addressed that question extensively in their briefing to this court.
 [*P62]  In these circumstances I do not think that humility counsels avoidance. Our case law, as it stands, gives an incomplete answer to the question of the appropriate remedy for a violation of article I, section 14 of the Utah Constitution. This is not constitutional territory we have left uncharted. It is territory we have mapped partially—in a manner leaving the important questions unresolved.
 [*P63]  Justice Himonas says that there is no pressing need for us to intervene to resolve the question presented. Supra ¶ 29. But that misses a key impact of our decision to leave the constitutional question presented by this case only partially answered: So long as we preserve the Larocco-Thompson rule without addressing the availability of exceptions we are fostering uncertainty and litigation in the lower courts without the benefit of further guidance from this court.31 
 [*P64]  For that reason I think the usual presumption of constitutional avoidance is rebutted here. We do not advance the cause of judicial humility by painting a partial picture  of the constitutional doctrine in this important field. In fact our decision to do so affirmatively undermines a core premise of the doctrine of constitutional avoidance. By leaving the exclusionary rule in place we are actively foreclosing policy judgments by the democratically elected branches of our government. We do so, moreover, without ever engaging in any careful constitutional analysis. See State v. Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶ 46, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring) (noting that the court in Larocco and Thompson "embraced an independent state exclusionary rule . . . without ever considering the original meaning of the constitutional provision in question").
 [*P65]  This is not humble restraint. It is a decision that may in time cement the exclusionary rule in place without any analysis of its constitutionality or elaboration of exceptions to its application. See id. ¶ 59 (noting that the exclusionary rule recognized in Larocco and Thompson may in time "become so ingrained in our jurisprudence that its reconsideration [will] be difficult"). And this "humble restraint" restrains both us and the legislature, in our rulemaking capacities, from innovating and adjusting the remedy to ensure that the citizens of Utah have effective and meaningful redress when their section 14 rights have been violated.
 [*P66]  For that reason I see this as the exceptional case in which the presumption of avoidance is overcome. I would reach the constitutional question presented in this case because I think the usual premises of the presumption of avoidance cut the other way here.
B
 [*P67]  That leaves the question whether our decisions in Larocco and Thompson are nonetheless entitled to deference as a matter of stare decisis. Our cases speak of "not overrul[ing] our precedents 'lightly.'" Eldridge v. Johndrow, 2015 UT 21, ¶ 21, 345 P.3d 553 (citation omitted). We have emphasized that the doctrine of stare decisis promotes the stability of the law and "the public's substantial reliance interests upon an established legal principle." Id. ¶ 35 (citation omitted). But we have also long held that the doctrine of stare decisis states a "presumption," not a "binding legal rule to be blindly followed." Id. ¶ 22 (quoting 20 Am. Jur. 2d Courts § 131 (2005)). The presumption of stare decisis is rebuttable. And it may be rebutted where we are convinced "more good than harm will come by departing from precedent." Utah Dep't. of Transp. v. Admiral Beverage Corp., 2011 UT 62, ¶ 16, 275 P.3d 208 (citation omitted).
 [*P68]  A threshold question under the doctrine of stare decisis is "how firmly" a line of "precedent has become established in the law since it was handed down." Eldridge, 2015 UT 21, ¶ 22, 345 P.3d 553. In making that assessment we consider "the age of the precedent, how well it has worked in practice, its consistency with other legal principles, and the extent to which people's reliance on the precedent would create injustice or hardship if it were overturned." Id. We also assess "the persuasiveness of the authority and reasoning on which the precedent was originally based." Id.
 [*P69]  The point of this inquiry is to balance the important goal of maintaining stability in the law against our ongoing commitment to getting the law "right." The first-listed set of considerations is aimed at assessing the downsides of overruling precedent. If a law is working well in practice and sustains significant reliance interests, it may be costly to reform the law by overruling precedent. And that is a point favoring deference to precedent. The second consideration quoted above goes to the upside of overruling an erroneous precedent. The more clearly errant a prior decision, the greater then need to set it aside in advancing our commitment to the rule of law.
 [*P70]  This is what our cases mean when they speak of more "good than harm" coming from overruling a prior opinion. The principal harm is in undermining stability of our law and reliance interests built around our precedent. See Austad v. Austad, 2 Utah 2d 49, 269 P.2d 284, 290 (Utah 1954) (explaining that the "reason underlying" stare decisis is "that people should know what their legal rights are as defined by judicial precedent, and having conducted their affairs in reliance  on such rights, ought not to have them swept away by judicial fiat"). Thus, the argument for overruling a prior decision is strongest when the costs of overruling (from a reliance or stability standpoint) are low and the benefits (from a rule of law standpoint) are high.32 
 [*P71]  And in my view that is the case here. The usual costs of overruling precedent are not implicated here because Larocco and Thompson are not deeply rooted in our law, are unworkable in practice, and do not sustain significant reliance interests.
 [*P72]  First, Larocco and Thompson are far from deeply rooted. Those decisions ignored contrary precedent from this court—State v. Aime, 62 Utah 476, 220 P. 704, 708 (Utah 1923) (unanimously holding that "the admissibility of evidence is not affected by the illegality of the means through which it has been obtained"), and State v. Fair, 10 Utah 2d 365, 353 P.2d 615, 615 (Utah 1960) (concluding that "[i]t is not necessary to determine whether or not [a] search was legal, because this court has previously held that evidence, even though illegally obtained, is admissible"). In jettisoning this precedent, moreover, our opinions in Larocco (a plurality) and Thompson (a majority) "made no reference to the text, history, or original meaning" of article I, section 14 of the Utah Constitution.33  Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶ 42, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring). Instead they simply "deemed it 'useful to examine opinions from other state courts'—opinions indicating a trend of '[a]t least eighteen states' that had 'adopted an independent state constitutional exclusionary rule.'" Id. (alteration in original) (citation omitted).
 [*P73]  Thus, our precedents adopting a Utah exclusionary rule did not engage in independent constitutional analysis. We were "simply jumping on what [we] perceived as the state exclusionary rule bandwagon." Id. ¶ 43. And this substantially reduces the downsides of repudiating these decisions. The costs of overruling precedent are diminished where the precedent in question "abandon[ed] [a] long established" rule and "failed to cite [a previous] line of cases altogether." State v. Menzies, 889 P.2d 393, 399 (Utah 1994), superseded in part by constitutional amendment as recognized in State v. Goins, 2017 UT 61,     P.3d    . That is precisely what Larocco and Thompson did. And that renders them ripe for reconsideration.
 [*P74]  This is not the only basis for concluding that Larocco and Thompson are vulnerable under our doctrine of stare decisis. A second consideration is the undeveloped state of our law in this field. We have not had occasion to decide whether and to what extent to adopt exceptions to the exclusionary rule—exceptions like those embraced by the United States Supreme Court in a long line of decisions in the past few decades.34  Again this was a key point of dispute in this case.  The district court declined to embrace a "good faith" exception to the Utah exclusionary rule like that established in federal law in United Leon, 468 U.S. at 897. And the briefing on appeal argued at some length about whether that decision was appropriate as a matter of state constitutional law.
 [*P75]  This is the key question of state constitutional law in this field. There is no evidentiary exclusion if the exclusionary rule is overridden by an exception. And this court has not yet decided that question. Unless and until we do so there can be no significant reliance interests on the general adoption of an exclusionary rule in Larocco and Thompson. "Because the dimensions and scope of the Utah exclusionary rule have not yet been established, there is little ground for an argument that the rule is so settled that it is beyond reconsideration on reliance grounds." Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶ 60, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring).
 [*P76]  For these reasons I see little downside to our reconsideration of the exclusionary rule embraced in Larocco and Thompson. I would therefore proceed to consider "the persuasiveness of the authority and reasoning on which the precedent was originally based." Eldridge, 2015 UT 21, ¶ 22, 345 P.3d 553. And for reasons set forth in detail above I would conclude that these decisions are ripe for repudiation.

 

