
 [*P87]  I concur in the majority opinion but write separately to register my continuing discomfort with the proportionality standard established in State v. Houston, 2015 UT 36, 353 P.3d 55.14  In Houston I set forth my view that article I, section 9 of the Utah Constitution, as originally understood, "does not deputize the courts to second-guess punishments they deem excessive or lacking in proportionality, but only to proscribe methods of punishment historically rejected as barbaric or torturous." Houston, 2015 UT 40, ¶ 157 (Lee, A.C.J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). This remains my firmly held position. The briefing and argument in this case have only reinforced the concerns that I expressed in Houston. They demonstrate that judicial review for proportionality is both incompatible with the original meaning of the Utah Constitution and too "hazy and unworkable" to establish a reliable "guidepost" for judges and litigants. See id. ¶ 146.
 [*P88]  My point is not to fault the majority for its basis for resolving this case. The Houston standard is, as the majority notes, the law of the State of Utah. So unless and until that standard is set aside, the court cannot be faulted for applying it. I write separately, however, to reiterate some of the  concerns that I raised in Houston—and to observe that they are highlighted by our disposition of the case before us on appeal.
 [*P89]  The majority concludes that Mr. Tulley's sentence—one-to-fifteen years (enhanced from zero-to-five years) for aggravated abuse of a vulnerable adult—would not "shock the moral conscience of all reasonable people." Supra ¶ 78. Yet the court offers little insight into the basis of that conclusion. And I see no way for us to make that sort of judgment in any reliable, transparent way. Without access to polling data (hardly a basis for judicial decision making) I am unsure how we can gauge the "moral conscience" of the people on the propriety of a given criminal sentence. The best evidence available to us on that question is the view expressed by the people's representatives in the legislature, who enacted the applicable sentence enhancement provision into law. See Utah Code § 76-3-203.5. It seems a little presumptuous for judges to purport to understand the people's conscience better than their elected representatives (who are regularly accountable to them in elections).
 [*P90]  This standard thus asks us to second-guess the judgment made by the legislature by consulting our "humanitarian instincts" and personal beliefs. See Houston, 2015 UT 40, ¶ 155 (Lee, A.C.J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). Our instincts and beliefs are useful—and even essential—on any of a range of discretionary judgment calls we make in the judiciary. But they can't form the reliable basis for a principle of constitutional law.
 [*P91]  For now I am content to concur in an opinion that applies our precedent to the resolution of the case before us. But I, for one, would remain open to an invitation that we revisit the standard we established in Houston in an appropriate case in the future.

 

