 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P24]  I concur in the court's disposition of this case but disagree with its decision to reach out to address an issue that is both foreclosed by the posture of this appeal and unnecessary to the judgment. Specifically, I see no basis for opining, as the court does in paragraphs 11-15, on whether consideration of a victim's sexual predisposition is "necessary to the determination of guilt" under Utah Code section 76-5-406(11) or "defies the language and the logic of" that provision. Supra ¶¶ 13, 14.
 [*P25]  The parties' failure to challenge the jury instructions in this case prevents us from reaching that question. Those instructions arguably made evidence of a victim's sexual predisposition pertinent to the issue of enticement. Supra ¶ 13 (quoting the jury instruction's definition of enticement as "consist[ing] of words intended to cause a person to do something that person would not otherwise do" (emphasis added)). And because the propriety of the jury instruction's definition of "entice" is not before us on appeal, we must accept that instruction as it operated in this case. Deciding the proper definition of "entice" under the applicable statute is accordingly beyond our reach. On this posture, we cannot and need not either "reject" or accept any one definition of "entice." Supra ¶¶ 13, 15.1 
 [*P26]   Moreover, the court's determination—that "under no definition" of entice would evidence of a victim's sexual naiveté/experience "be necessary to the determination of guilt," supra ¶ 13—is unnecessary to the resolution of the constitutional questions before us on appeal. The basis for the trial court's decision to arrest the verdict was the conclusion that evidence of prior sexual advances should have been admitted under Utah Rule of Evidence 412 because exclusion of the evidence violated Billingsley's Confrontation Clause and due process rights. See Utah R. Evid. 412(a)(2), (b)(3) (stating that "evidence offered to prove a victim's sexual predisposition" is inadmissible in this type of case unless "exclusion would violate the defendant's constitutional rights"). Those constitutional questions have straightforward answers, neither of which requires us to establish acceptable parameters for the evidence required to prove enticement.
 [*P27]  First, Billingsley argues that "[b]y denying [her] the opportunity to inquire into the alleged victims' prior sexual behavior and predisposition, . . . the trial court unjustifiably lowered the State's burden of proof on lack of consent by enticement," thus violating her right to due process. This argument fails on its own terms because Billingsley was not denied that opportunity. On cross-examination, Billingsley's counsel challenged M.M. by suggesting that he had made an inappropriate comment about Billingsley's breasts to a group of students. Her counsel also elicited testimony from D.P. that M.M.'s "hormones were always raging," a notion reiterated by her counsel in suggesting that M.M. was a "walking hormone . . . up for everything" who was "looking for some action and thought he would get it with Ms. Billingsley." This testimony speaks to M.M.'s "prior sexual behavior and predisposition" just as much as the excluded evidence—what Billingsley describes as "M.M.'s flirtatious activity with a teacher." Because the jury heard this evidence, Billingsley cannot now successfully argue that the State was relieved of proving enticement.2  Indeed, Billingsley's argument ultimately distills to a complaint that the jury failed to credit the evidence it heard about M.M.'s sexual predisposition; that argument does not implicate her due process rights in the slightest.
 [*P28]  Billingsley's Confrontation Clause argument is similar and just as easily rejected. She contends that she was prevented from "query[ing] the alleged victims about their prior sexual knowledge, experience, or behavior on cross-examination" or from "call[ing] defense witnesses regarding the same," which violated her rights under the Confrontation Clause. But, as noted above, Billingsley was not prevented from doing these things. Supra ¶ 27. The jury heard about M.M.'s past inappropriate remark about Billingsley and his status as a "walking hormone." The most that Billingsley can say is that she would have liked to introduce more and better evidence of this type. But "the Confrontation Clause guarantees an opportunity for effective cross-examination, not cross-examination that is effective in whatever way, and to whatever extent, the defense might wish." Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S. 673, 679, 106 S. Ct. 1431, 89 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1986) (internal quotation marks omitted). With this evidence in play, it was hardly  "impossible" for Billingsley to confront M.M. with evidence of his sexual predisposition.
 [*P29]  This is all we need say to resolve this case. That is not to say that I do not understand the court's desire to do more. Conditioning a sexual crime on the child-victim's sexual past and proclivities—as the jury instruction in this case seemed to do—is objectionable on many levels. In a case where that issue was squarely before us, I would join the court's analysis on that point. But this is not that case. I would resolve the issue presented in this appeal by deciding that Billingsley had a constitutionally sufficient opportunity to explore M.M.'s sexual predisposition, even absent the excluded evidence.

 

