 in part and dissenting in part:
 [*P57]  I concur in large part in Chief Justice Durrant's opinion for the court, but take issue with two points in the majority's analysis. First, I disagree with the court's decision to resolve on appeal the question whether Alexander had knowledge of the elements of the crime he pled guilty to. That question was neither pressed by Alexander in his motion to withdraw nor resolved by the district court on the record. Because our opinion today breaks new ground in clarifying the centrality of that issue, we should not fault the parties (least of all the non-moving party) for failing to present evidence of relevance to its resolution. I would give the parties a chance to litigate the key factual question on remand.
 [*P58]  Second, I would base the decision affirming the court of appeals' refusal to engage in harmless error review on the textual reach of rule 11(l), not on a limiting construction based on our professed intent in adopting the rule. In my view, the "substantial rights" language in rule 11(l) is an unmistakable reference to harmless error review. Yet although the rule envisions an evaluation of harmlessness or prejudice with respect to "[a]ny variance from the procedures required by th[e] rule," Utah R. Crim. P. 11(l), this case does not turn on a mere variance from the rules but, as the court properly concludes, on the statutory question whether the defendant's plea was knowingly and voluntarily entered. Rule 11(l)'s harmless error standard thus has no application here, and I would affirm on that basis.
I
 [*P59]  As the majority correctly concludes, a plea withdrawal motion cannot rest on a mere technical violation of the prophylactic requirements of rule 11. The withdrawal statute in Utah, rather, requires proof that the plea was entered unknowingly or involuntarily by the defendant. Utah Code § 77-13-6(2)(a). On that basis, the court of appeals erred in its decision to order the withdrawal of Alexander's guilty plea on the mere basis of the district court's failure to follow rule 11 in every particular.
 [*P60]  To this extent I'm on the same page with the majority, which reaches this same conclusion. I part company with my colleagues, however, on the court's decision to affirm the court of appeals' decision reversing the denial of Alexander's motion to withdraw on the alternative ground that its "review of the record does not demonstrate thatAlexander was informed of or understood the essential elements of the burglary charge." Supra ¶ 37.
 [*P61]   The court's assessment of the state of the record seems correct as far as it goes. But it is equally true that "the record does not demonstrate thatAlexander was [not] informed of or [did not] underst[and] the essential elements of the burglary charge." The record is simply silent on this controlling question. And the reason is straightforward: Alexander's motion to withdraw never asserted that he lacked knowledge of the elements of the crime, but rested on the bare assertion of a rule 11 violation.
 [*P62]  In his motion to withdraw, Alexander relied solely on his legal theory that the district court's plea colloquy did not strictly follow rule 11(e). This oversight, he argued, failed to "provide [him] the factual support for the act component or the mental state component of sexual battery." Thus, Alexander's motion alleged that the court's noncompliance ultimately led to a plea that "was not entered knowingly and voluntarily pursuant to [rule] 11 and the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution." Although the motion mouthed the words "knowingly and voluntarily," however, Alexander never raised the factual question of his state of mind in entering the guilty plea. He simply rested on the legal theory that a rule 11 violation alone was sufficient to render his plea unknowing or involuntary and thus subject to withdrawal.
 [*P63]  Alexander pressed this same theory in the subsequent motion hearing, arguing that "strict compliance" with rule 11 was required and that "in this case strict compliance has not occurred, because . . . . [t]here is nothing either in the Amended Information or in the statement in advance of plea, or in the colloquy . . . that defines and sets forth the elements of sexual battery." Thus, without ever alleging that he did not know the elements of the crime he was pleading to, Alexander framed his argument not as a question of fact but as a pure question of law—whether the court's colloquy "strictly complied" with rule 11(e).
 [*P64]  The court and the parties at the motion hearing focused on this legal issue, and never engaged the critical factual question of Alexander's state of mind. It is no surprise, then, that the district court received no evidence one way or the other on Alexander's knowledge of the elements of his crime. Under Alexander's own theory, he had no reason to introduce evidence of his state of mind; to him, the court's deficient colloquy was enough. The State likewise had no incentive to present evidence on a matter that was never in issue.
 [*P65]  The absence of evidence in the record, then, can hardly be counted against the prosecution. Alexander never claimed an absence of knowledge of the elements of the crime he was pleading to, and the State thus had no reason to introduce evidence establishing that "Alexander was informed of or understood the essential elements of the burglary charge." Supra ¶ 37.
 [*P66]  For these reasons, the record likewise tells us nothing about the answer to the question the court now deems dispositive. It simply indicates that the parties and the lower courts proceeded on an erroneous assumption about the controlling law. We have now corrected that error. And having done so, the correct and fair response is to give the parties the chance to litigate the question they have never litigated and that we now deem controlling.1 
 [*P67]  The question of Alexander's state of mind when entering his guilty plea is a classic question of fact.2  We owe substantial deference to the resolution of such an issue by the district court, as it is the court in our system with procedures for—and experience and expertise in—accepting and weighing testimonial and other evidence.3 
 [*P68]  We flout that deference when we render our own judgment on a controlling question of fact without ever giving the district court a first crack at the issue. And we deprive the parties of their rightful day in court when we resolve matters on the basis of their failure to present evidence that they never had a meaningful opportunity to present. I respectfully dissent as I see no basis for faulting the State for failing to present evidence that the defendant's motion never called into question.
 [*P69]  If anything, the lack of evidence in the record ought to be counted against the party who bears the burden of proof. That party, of course, is Alexander, as the party pressing the motion to set aside his earlier guilty plea. The majority recognizes that he bears the burden as the moving party. Supra ¶ 23. That fact alone arguably should be enough to affirm the denial of Alexander's motion to withdraw, as a core element of the burden of proof is the burden of presenting some evidence to sustain the movant's case.4  The court turns that principle on its head, faulting the non-moving party for failing to anticipate an alternative argument that the movant might raise on appeal—and might convince the appellate court to reach without a remand.
 [*P70]  At a minimum, the prosecution is at least entitled to a remand to respond to the factual basis of the motion to withdraw as reformulated on appeal. I respectfully dissent from the court's refusal to allow for that proceeding.5 
  II
 [*P71]  I agree with the majority's affirmance of the court of appeals' refusal to conduct a harmless error review in this case, but would base the decision on somewhat different grounds. The text of rule 11(l) states that "[a]ny variance from the procedures required by this rule which does not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded." Utah R. Crim. P. 11(l). In context, the consideration of an effect on "substantial rights" is an unmistakable reference to traditional "harmless error" review, which asks whether an intermediate error in the proceedings below has a prejudicial effect on the ultimate judgment. The "substantial rights" formulation appears in both our federal and state rules of criminal procedure,6  and has long been associated with harmless error.7  Given the settled meaning of the text of the rule, we are in no position to override it with an assurance as to our true "intent" in adopting the rule, supra ¶ 44.
 [*P72]  We have procedures in place for amending the language of rules we deem ill-advised or unwieldy. Unless and until we alter the text we have previously adopted, lawyers and litigants ought to be able to rely on the settled understanding of the words employed in our rules. Where our rules incorporate legal terms of art, those terms should be deemed to convey their settled meaning and should not be displaced by our subsequent "clarification" of what we really meant.
 [*P73]  I would accordingly read rule 11(l) to mean what it says, which is to instruct courts to disregard "[a]ny variance from the procedures required by this rule which does not affect substantial rights," Utah R. Crim. P. 11(l), in the traditional sense that harmless, non-prejudicial violations of rule 11 do not justify setting aside a judgment. That is not to say that I would find error in the court of appeals' refusal to engage in harmless error review in this case. As the majority properly concludes, this case is not about a mere "variance from the procedures required by" rule 11, as such a variance is not enough to sustain a motion to withdraw a guilty plea. Instead, the question in this case is a statutory one—whether Alexander's plea was knowingly and voluntarily entered. That statutory question in no way implicates the rule 11(l) standard, which deals only with "variance[s] from the procedures required by th[e] rule."
 [*P74]  Harmless error review is thus inapplicable here under the text of rule 11(l). I would affirm the court of appeals' treatment of this issue on that basis, without relying on a construction of rule 11 that limits the reach of its plain language.

 

