 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P113]  I concur in the opinion of the court in part and concur in the judgment affirming the conviction entered against Mr. Houston. I write separately, however, to express my disagreement with the majority on two principal points: (1) I would not deem Houston's challenge to his sentence to be properly presented under rule 22(e) of our rules of criminal procedure (but instead subject only to review for plain error); and (2) I would reject Houston's state constitutional challenge to his sentence based on an original understanding of the Utah Constitution, which categorically forecloses the proportionality challenge advanced in this case.
I. PRESERVATION AND UTAH RULE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 22(e)
 [*P114]  Houston failed to raise a constitutional challenge to his sentence in the proceedings below. Despite that failure, the majority deems the constitutional claims advanced on appeal to be properly presented under rule 22(e) of the Utah Rules of Criminal Procedure. Supra ¶ 26. That provision expressly authorizes a court to "correct an illegal sentence, or a sentence imposed in an illegal manner, at any time." Utah R. Crim. P. 22(e). In recent cases, however, we have adopted limiting constructions of this rule. Most recently, in State v. Prion, 2012 UT 15, 274 P.3d 919, we noted that "rule 22(e) is based on an antecedent in the federal rules," and we limited our state rule to the traditional application of its federal antecedent. Id. ¶ 22. Specifically, Prion held that a challenge to an "illegal sentence" under rule 22(e) is limited to "instances 'when the sentence imposed exceeds the statutorily-authorized limits, violates the Double Jeopardy Clause, or is ambiguous or internally contradictory.'" Id. (quoting United States v. Pavlico, 961 F.2d 440, 443 (4th Cir. 1992)).
 [*P115]  As the Prion opinion explained, this traditional limitation (imported from federal law) is aimed at striking "a careful balance between the goal of correcting illegal sentences on one hand and . . . encouraging preservation and finality on the other." Id. Yet the Prion standard is not a subjective balancing test. Nor does it leave room for the standard embraced by the majority—of opening the door to unpreserved challenges to sentences that are "facial" and not "as-applied." Supra ¶ 26. Instead, the standard we articulated in Prion is an objective one based on past practice under a parallel (but subsequently amended) federal rule. As stated plainly in Prion, rule 22(e) leaves room only for challenges to sentences that exceed statutory limits, that violate double jeopardy, or that are ambiguous or internally contradictory. Prion, 2012 UT 15, ¶ 22, 274 P.3d 919.
 [*P116]  The majority overrules this standard, replacing it with a standard allowing a "facial challenge" to the constitutionality of a sentence but foreclosing "fact-intensive," "as-applied" challenges. Supra ¶¶ 18, 23, 26. The court purports to find support for this standard in Prion and its antecedents. See supra ¶¶ 24-27 (citing Prion and also State v. Candedo, 2010 UT 32, 232 P.3d 1008; State v. Telford, 2002 UT 51, 48 P.3d 228; and State v. Brooks, 908 P.2d 856 (Utah 1995)). But none of our prior opinions adopt the formulation established today.
 [*P117]  Granted, the Prion opinion explained the rationale behind this limitation in terms that emphasized the downsides of opening the door to unlimited challenges to the constitutionality of a sentence. Our opinion warned, for example, of the abuse and anomaly that would ensue if our law "elevate[d] challenges to sentencing proceedings over parallel challenges to the guilt phase of a trial." Prion, 2012 UT 15, ¶ 20, 274 P.3d 919. And we cautioned specifically against "a fact-intensive challenge to the legality of a sentencing proceeding asserted long after the time for raising it in the initial trial or direct appeal." Id. But the quoted language was only an explanation of the policy basis for the standard we clarified in Prion; it was not the standard itself.
 [*P118]  The Prion standard, rather, was the traditional formulation we imported from longstanding cases interpreting the federal rule incorporated into our rule 22(e)—encompassing only "instances 'when the sentence imposed exceeds the statutorily-authorized limits, violates the Double Jeopardy Clause, or is ambiguous or internally contradictory.'" Id. ¶ 22. The majority is mistaken in its assertion that Prion "nowhere stated that we were adopting the federal limitation" as the holding of the court. Supra ¶ 24 n.35. We did so expressly, and repeatedly. See Prion, 2012 UT 15, ¶ 21, 274 P.3d 919 (noting that "[b]oth grounds" asserted by Prion "to challenge his revised sentence are consistent with the traditional, established bases for a rule 22(e) motion," and indicating that "we accordingly reject the State's procedural argument notwithstanding our acknowledgement of the need for a narrow construction of the rule" (emphasis added)); see also id. ¶ 23 ("[Prion's] 22(e) motion . . . is one that comes within the traditional bounds of the rule, and we accordingly uphold it against the State's procedural attack." (emphasis added)).
 [*P119]  Our Candedo opinion cannot properly be read to support the majority's new standard. Candedo did not establish a standard dependent on the "facial" or "as-applied" nature of a constitutional challenge to a sentence. Instead, the opinion in Candedo simply reversed the court of appeals' determination that an "illegal" sentence under rule 22(e) was limited to cases "where either the sentencing court has no jurisdiction, or . . . the sentence is beyond the authorized statutory range." 2010 UT 32, ¶ 10, 232 P.3d 1008 (alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted). And in so doing, Candedo stated generally that "if an offender's sentence is unconstitutional, the sentence is not authorized by the 'judgment of conviction,' and is therefore illegal." Id. ¶ 13. On that basis, Candedo held "that the court of appeals erred in failing to reach the merits of Candedo's" constitutional challenge "because the definition of illegal sentence under rule 22(e) is sufficiently broad to include constitutional violations that threaten the validity of the sentence." Id. ¶ 14. Our holding in Candedo, moreover, did not rest on a distinction between facial and as-applied challenges to a sentence.
 [*P120]  Indeed, our constitutional analysis (upholding Candedo's sentence against a substantive due process attack) ultimately rejected both facial and as-applied challenges. See id. ¶ 21 (holding "that Utah's probation statute generally, as well as the term of probation to which Candedo was sentenced, are rationally related to the state's legitimate interest"); id. ¶ 23 (acknowledging that "a defendant could successfully challenge a probation sentence that is truly arbitrary or discriminatory under the due process clause or prove that the probation statute is cruel and unusual, but such a case is not before us now"). And as to the governing standard, the Candedo opinion effectively punted on the specific sorts of constitutional claims that could be cognizable under rule 22(e). While acknowledging the state's argument that rule 22(e) countenances only claims that a sentence is "'patently' or 'manifestly' illegal," the Candedo court concluded that it was unnecessary to "reach" that issue if the claims at issue failed on their merits. Id. ¶ 14 (concluding that there is no need to "reach the issue of whether the sentence is 'patently' or 'manifestly' illegal" if the claim fails on its "merits").
 [*P121]  Our earlier decision in Telford is to the same effect. There we acknowledged that Telford challenged his sentence "on both per se and as applied grounds," 2002 UT 51, ¶ 2, 48 P.3d 228; noted that rule 22(e) is a narrow exception to the rule of preservation, allowing only the "correction of manifestly illegal sentences," id. ¶ 5; and stopped short of defining the limiting standard (of what is "manifestly illegal") because the claims at issue clearly failed on their merits, id. ¶ 6 (rejecting claims under the Sixth Amendment and article I, section 12 of the Utah Constitution on the ground that these provisions provided "no articulable basis for attacking [Telford's] sentence").1 
 [*P122]  The majority also cites State v. Brooks, 908 P.2d 856 (Utah 1995), in support of its new standard, supra ¶ 27, but the Brooks opinion is in line with the approach in Telford and Candedo. As the majority indicates, the Brooks opinion states that "nothing is to be gained by remanding the case to the trial court" when "the pertinent facts are undisputed and a purely legal question with respect to which the trial court has no discretion remains to be decided." 980 P.2d at 860. But the Brooks opinion does not adopt the facial/as-applied distinction embraced by the majority. It simply holds that rule 22(e) may sometimes "permit[] the court of appeals to consider the legality of a sentence even if the issue is raised for the first time on appeal," while rejecting the applicability of the rule in the context of a claim that "[i]n substance" challenges the underlying conviction and not the sentence. Id. (explaining that Brooks's claim, while styled as a challenge to his sentence, was ultimately a challenge to his "conviction for a lesser included offense").
 [*P123]  I acknowledge the plausibility of the alternative readings of our prior cases advanced by the majority opinion. As that opinion suggests, the Candedo opinion may plausibly be read to have endorsed the viability of any "constitutional violations that threaten the validity of the sentence." See supra ¶ 24 n.35. As for Telford and Brooks, those opinions may also be understood to have interpreted rule 22(e) in a manner endorsing an operative legal standard—in Telford, the notion that the rule is limited to the correction of sentences that are "manifestly illegal," 2002 UT 51, ¶ 5, 48 P.3d 228; and in Brooks, the principle that the rule encompasses challenges to sentences that are "patently illegal," 908 P.2d at 860.
 [*P124]  Yet these constructions of rule 22(e) are untenable. The broad formulation in Candedo would erase our rules of preservation for challenges to sentences and thereby treat sentencing proceedings as somehow more significant than trials. That makes no sense, as even the majority opinion today recognizes. And the standards in Telford and Brooks are unworkable. We can assess illegality; but "patent" or "manifest" illegality are concepts inviting arbitrary decision-making.
 [*P125]  Our Prion opinion filled the gap left by the competing standards set forth in our caselaw. Facing the untenably broad formulation in Candedo and the unworkable premises of Telford and Brooks, Prion was faced with the task of determining conclusively the scope of the rule 22(e) exception. And because the claims in Prion could not easily be brushed aside as meritless, we could not easily sidestep the issue of the appropriate standard under rule 22(e). In addressing this question, moreover, Prion clearly and expressly defined an objective standard under rule 22(e)—a standard, as noted above, that tied our state rule to cases under its federal antecedent, and that limited the challenges countenanced by the rule to those attacking sentences that exceed statutory limits, that violate double jeopardy, or that are ambiguous or internally contradictory.2  Prion, 2012 UT 15, ¶ 22, 274 P.3d 919.
 [*P126]  This holding was significant. It established an objective, historically rooted limitation on the broad terms of rule 22(e)—a limitation that was essential to preserving the policies and domain of the doctrine of preservation, and of avoiding the absurdity of a regime that would preference constitutional challenges to sentences over constitutional challenges to underlying convictions. See id. ¶ 20 (warning of the prospect of "abuse" of a broad standard under rule 22(e), which would undermine the policies behind the law of preservation and would "elevate challenges to sentencing proceedings over parallel challenges to the guilt phase of a trial").
 [*P127]  Our decision in Prion was simple, straightforward, and unanimous. I would reaffirm it and apply it here. And I would accordingly deem Houston's challenges to his sentence uncovered by rule 22(e), as none of them involve a claim that his sentence exceeded statutory limits, violated double jeopardy, or was ambiguous or internally contradictory. Thus, I would analyze Houston's constitutional challenges to his sentence under a standard of plain error review, which is the standard that applies to an unpreserved challenge to a sentence that is not covered by rule 22(e).
 [*P128]  I would also observe that the court's analysis is itself unfaithful to the standard it postulates. Some of Houston's challenges to his sentence seem to be "as-applied" challenges. See supra ¶¶ 30-32 (addressing Houston's Apprendi challenge); supra ¶¶ 49-51 (addressing Houston's Unnecessary Rigor Clause challenge). These claims clearly implicate a degree of fact-intensive analysis. Even "facial challenges," moreover, may require fact-intensive analysis, in that such challenges require a litigant to "establish that no set of circumstances exists under which the [statute] would be valid." United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745, 107 S. Ct. 2095, 95 L. Ed. 2d 697 (1987).3  If this is the sort of claim the majority means to preserve under criminal rule 22(e), the court has not succeeded in adopting a "limited" standard. It has instead opened the door to a broad range of claims that are quite often fact-intensive.
 [*P129]  The back-and-forth between the majority and dissenting opinions is illustrative. The dissent cites extensive social science research in support of its conclusion that Houston's life-without-parole sentence is incompatible with the standard of proportionality that it advances. Infra ¶¶ 258-269 (cataloguing social science research on the nature of juvenile cognitive functions and its impact on principles of retribution and rehabilitation). And the majority offers responses similarly invoking social science material. Supra ¶¶ 58-59 (addressing the special status of minors based on "science and social science research, including longitudinal studies and brain mapping"). With this background, it seems apparent that the cruel and unusual punishment challenge asserted by Houston is a fact-intensive one. For me, this underscores the untenable nature of the standard adopted by the court today. In time the court will be required to reject it, and replace it with a more workable one. I would avoid that problem by retaining the standard we articulated in Prion.
 [*P130]  Finally, I would register a plea that we revisit this issue immediately through our rulemaking process. Our law as it stands under rule 22(e) as written is confusing, fuzzy, and perverse. The confusion is in the terms of the rule. The rule as it stands is a trap for an unwary litigant. We should not retain a rule that says one thing and means another. The fuzziness is in the court's standard as articulated today. There is no clear, established distinction between "facial" and "as-applied" challenges to a sentence.4  So the standard we have adopted is sure to lead to uncertainty and arbitrary decisionmaking going forward. Lastly, the perversion is in a legal regime that suspends the law of preservation for "facial" constitutional challenges to a sentence while retaining the law of preservation for parallel challenges to a conviction. That is backwards. If anything, an unconstitutional conviction ought to be more troubling.
 [*P131]  The majority's standard under rule 22(e) should not stand. We should amend the rule to address the significant problems that are highlighted by today's opinion.
II. HOUSTON'S CONSTITUTIONAL CLAIMS
 [*P132]  For the above reasons, I would address Houston's constitutional claims under a plain error standard of review. And I would reject all of them under that standard, as Houston has not asserted—and cannot conceivably claim—that the sentence imposed runs afoul of established legal standards. See, e.g., State v. Nielsen, 2014 UT 10, ¶ 58, 326 P.3d 645 (noting that for an error to be "plain" it must be legal in nature, and an "obvious" error "not reasonably in dispute" (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 [*P133]  That is as far as we need to go to resolve this case. Because my colleagues see the matter differently, however, and proceed to address the merits of Houston's claims as if they were covered by rule 22(e), it seems appropriate for me to meet their analysis on its own terms. In so doing, I would first note that assuming rule 22(e) to apply to Houston's claims, I would concur in the majority's analysis of Houston's federal constitutional claims. See supra ¶¶ 29-63, 69-108.
 [*P134]  To the extent Houston is asserting a federal constitutional challenge to his sentence, we are of course bound to follow the precedents of the United States Supreme Court under the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. And because those precedents appear to adopt a form of "proportionality" review,5  we must apply that same standard here in assessing Houston's federal constitutional claim. I concur in the majority opinion's analysis as it applies to this federal claim. I would reject Houston's Eighth Amendment argument for the reasons set forth in the court's opinion. See supra ¶¶ 52-63.
 [*P135]  Houston's state constitutional claim is another matter. To the extent Houston is challenging his sentence under article I, section 9 of the Utah Constitution, it is our prerogative and responsibility to articulate the applicable legal standard. And on that point my grounds for rejecting Houston's constitutional challenge to his sentence extend beyond those set forth in the majority opinion.
 [*P136]  Unlike the majority, I would not assume that the Utah Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause incorporates a standard of proportionality authorizing appellate courts to second-guess a lawfully imposed sentence on grounds of excessiveness. Supra ¶ 64.6  And unlike the dissent, infra ¶¶ 213-251, I would not interpret article I, section 9 to authorize this court to consult our "humanitarian instincts," infra ¶ 255, or our sense of "evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society." Infra ¶ 213.
 [*P137]  Instead, based on the original meaning of the text of article I, section 9, I would conclude that the Utah Constitution forbids only those modes of punishment that were repudiated as "cruel" at the time of the adoption of this provision and that are "unusual" in the sense of being contrary to established practice. And I would accordingly reject Houston's state constitutional claim on grounds narrower than those embraced by the majority.
 [*P138]  First, I would repudiate the dicta in this court's prior interpretations of article I, section 9, which articulate an unworkable standard and accordingly do not merit deference under the doctrine of stare decisis. Second, I would adopt an originalist conception of article I, section 9—a standard that leaves no room for proportionality analysis and prohibits only those methods of punishment that are so barbaric or cruel that they were barred by longstanding law or practice. Finally, applying this standard, I would reject Houston's state constitutional claim because he raises no challenge to the method of his punishment but only challenges his term of confinement on grounds of proportionality.
A. Utah Supreme Court Precedent
 [*P139]  In State v. Herrera, 1999 UT 64, ¶ 39, 993 P.2d 854, this court asserted that the Utah Constitution's prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments encompasses a principle of proportionality. In the Herrera court's words, "a criminal punishment is cruel and unusual" under article I, section 9 "if the punishment is so disproportionate to the offense committed that it shock[s] the moral sense of all reasonable men as to what is right and proper under the circumstances." Id. ¶ 33 (alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 [*P140]  A threshold question for me is whether to afford stare decisis deference to the standard set forth in Herrera. Such deference is a presumptive starting point. See Austad v. Austad, 2 Utah 2d 49, 269 P.2d 284, 290 (Utah 1954). And for good reason. "The doctrine of stare decisis is ingrained in our law and is entitled to serious consideration." Id. "The reason underlying [this doctrine] is that people should know what their legal rights are as defined by judicial precedent, and having conducted their affairs in reliance on such rights, ought not to have them swept away by judicial fiat." Id.
 [*P141]  Yet the presumption of stare decisis is rebuttable. And it is rebutted where its reliance-based justification is not implicated, as where the precedent in question adopted a standard that is vague or unworkable. State v. Menzies, 889 P.2d 393, 399 (Utah 1994). I would decline to defer to the Herrera standard on two principal grounds.
 [*P142]  First and most fundamentally, no majority opinion of this court has ever employed a state standard of proportionality that is distinct from the federal standard. Herrera articulated a state standard, but it did so in a manner that simply parroted the governing federal standard. Thus, in applying the above-quoted standard of proportionality, the Herrera court cited precedent applying the federal standard and concluded that the federal standard "appl[ied] with equal force to our consideration of Herrera's claims under the cruel and unusual punishment[s] clause of the Utah Constitution." 1999 UT 64, ¶ 38, 993 P.2d 854.
 [*P143]  In support of the standard it employed, the Herrera court cited State v. Mace, 921 P.2d 1372, 1377-78 (Utah 1996). 1999 UT 64, ¶ 38, 993 P.2d 854. And the "cruel and unusual punishments" analysis in Mace is expressly and exclusively restricted to the Eighth Amendment. Mace, 921 P.2d at 1376 ("Mace has not separately briefed his state constitutional claim, and we do not reach it.").7  That likewise holds for the other majority opinion cited in Herrera—State v. Copeland, 765 P.2d 1266, 1270 (Utah 1988). Copeland's proportionality analysis was also federal in nature, as was the proportionality analysis in the other majority opinions from which Copeland's standards emanate. See id. (citing State v. Hanson, 627 P.2d 53, 56 (Utah 1981) (federal Eighth Amendment claim; citing, in turn, State v. Nance, 20 Utah 2d 372, 438 P.2d 542, 544 (Utah 1968) (articulating Eighth Amendment proportionality standard under Weems v. United States, 217 U.S. 349, 30 S. Ct. 544, 54 L. Ed. 793 (1910))).
 [*P144]  There is one other authority cited in Herrera for the state standard of proportionality that it adopted. See Herrera, 1999 UT 64 ¶ 33, 993 P.2d 854 (citing State v. Gardner, 947 P.2d 630, 633 (Utah 1997)). But the cited portion of Gardner is to an opinion that was in the minority on that point—an opinion of Justice Durham, joined only by Justice Stewart. See Gardner, 947 P.2d at 653. A majority of the court declined to embrace the Gardner court's state constitutional analysis. See id. (opinion of Zimmerman, A.C.J., expressing the view that the case could be dealt with on federal grounds, while declining to "reach the Utah constitutional issues dealt with by Justice Durham so sweepingly and at such length"); id. at 657 (opinion of Russon, J., joined by Howe, J.) (indicating the view that the sentence in question was constitutional, while asserting that the state constitutional question was not properly before the court given that the defendants "presented their oral arguments solely under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution").
 [*P145]  Thus, no majority of this court has ever adopted an independent standard of proportionality under article I, section 9 of the Utah Constitution. For the most part we have simply conflated the state and federal standards and treated them as indistinguishable—a determination that gives no independent significance to the state standard, and thus no basis for stare decisis reliance. And the sole exception to that rule is Gardner, in which a majority of the court refused to embrace any independent state standard. For that reason this is a case where the presumption in favor of stare decisis deference is rebutted, as no litigant could properly identify any independent standard under article I, section 9 that goes beyond a restatement of the binding federal standard.
 [*P146]  The second reason for rejecting Herrera is that the standard it identifies is a hazy and unworkable one. This is another ground rebutting the presumption of stare decisis.8  An unpredictable legal standard is simply not one that litigants can use as a guidepost in organizing their affairs. For that reason courts have long held that unworkable precedents do not qualify for stare decisis deference.9  This court's precedents on proportionality in sentencing are an archetype of unworkability. That fact is reflected in the federal decisions on which our own cases are based10  and in legal commentary.11 
 [*P147]  This problem is highlighted by the formulation set forth in the dissenting opinion in this case. Quoting the Nevada Supreme Court, the dissent proposes a standard of proportionality that would turn "'largely, if not entirely, upon the humanitarian instincts of the judiciary'"—a standard that openly acknowledges that "'[w]e have nothing to guide us in defining what is cruel and unusual apart from our consciences,'" or in other words, the "'mosaic of our beliefs, our backgrounds and the degree of our faith in the dignity of the human personality.'" Infra ¶ 255 (quoting Naovarath v. State, 105 Nev. 525, 779 P.2d 944, 947 (Nev. 1989)). No part of that formulation could sustain any reasonable reliance interests. No criminal defendant or prosecutor could reliably divine what the "consciences" or "beliefs" of the judges assessing a particular sentencing practice might dictate in any anticipated trial or appeal. The proportionality standard as formulated by the dissent is the very definition of unworkability. It cannot possibly sustain any reasonable reliance interests, and thus has no claim to stare decisis.
B. An Originalist View of Article I, Section 9
 [*P148]  For the above reasons, I would not feel bound to follow our prior pronouncements on the meaning of article I, section 9. Instead, I would take a fresh look at the important question of the meaning of the Utah Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. In so doing, I would employ an originalist method of interpreting the Utah Constitution.
 [*P149]  "Our state and federal constitutions are not just supreme; they are organic or constitutive, in that they establish the fundamental ground rules for lawmaking and fixed bulwarks against potential tyrannies of the majority." State v. Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶ 35, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring). The founding purpose of the U.S. Constitution was to "form[ ] the fundamental and paramount law of the nation," by establishing "certain limits not to be transcended" and "designed to be permanent." Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 176-77, 178, 2 L. Ed. 60 (1803) ("[T]hat those limits may not be mistaken, or forgotten, the constitution is written."). And the Utah Constitution serves a similar function. It establishes the foundations of our state government, and the fundamental rights of our citizens.
 [*P150]  This is the premise of originalism in constitutional interpretation. We implement the principles of the constitution as originally adopted because that is the very point of having a written constitution. When judges seize the discretion to amend and adapt the provisions of the constitution, those principles cease to be the "paramount law of the nation." Id. at 177. Or at least they can no longer be thought of as "permanent" rules that are "not to be transcended." Id. at 176. Thus, "originalism is not just a wise starting point; it is the beginning and end of the judge's function, and an essential limitation on judicial power." Walker, 2011 UT 53, ¶ 34, 267 P.3d 210 (Lee, J., concurring).
 [*P151]  The originalist understands the value—and even the inevitability—of adaptation of the law over time. Thus, the case for originalism is not, as is sometimes assumed, an insistence that the founding generation had a monopoly on wisdom.12  Instead, the originalist simply recognizes and respects the means by which our laws are supposed to adapt under the terms of the constitution. Such means are twofold: (a) amendment of the constitution through the super-majoritarian procedures set forth in its provisions13  and (b) the implementation of policies embraced by the people through their representatives in the political branches of government—by the adoption of statutes, regulations, and other laws within the limitations prescribed in the constitution.
 [*P152]  These and other forms of legal adaptation refute a common critique of originalism—that it shackles society to rule by a "dead hand."14  As these examples illustrate, the originalist does not consign our society to a static regime stuck in the founding era. He simply demands that change be effected in the manner and by the means prescribed by the constitution.15  And he is attuned to the perils of unelected judges overriding the terms of a document whose very purpose was to establish fixed limitations on our government, by means reserved to the people through the process of constitutional amendment.16 
 [*P153]  Thus, the words "cruel and unusual" "must be taken to mean what they meant to the minds of the voters of the state when the provision was adopted." Tintic Standard Mining Co. v. Utah Cnty., 80 Utah 491, 15 P.2d 633, 637 (Utah 1932). This is the approach to constitutional interpretation that this court has embraced—with a few notable exceptions17 —for most of its history.18 
 [*P154]  We should reinforce the originalist method of interpretation in this case. We should construe the terms of article I, section 9 as originally understood when that provision was adopted in 1896. And we should expressly repudiate the methodology of the dissent to the extent it rests on a review of "policy arguments in the form of economic and sociological materials," see ¶ 219 (citing Soc'y of Separationists, Inc. v. Whitehead, 870 P.2d 916, 921 n.6 (Utah 1991)), or an assertion of the heady prerogative of making constitutional law by the imposition of our "humanitarian instincts" "spring[ing] from the mosaic of our beliefs." Infra ¶ 255.19  That is the antithesis of an originalist interpretation of the constitutional text.
 [*P155]  A constitution rooted in "evolving standards" arising out of a judge's "humanitarian instincts" is no constitution at all. Or at least it is not a "written" constitution capable of "form[ing] the fundamental and paramount law of the nation," or of establishing "certain limits not to be transcended" and "designed to be permanent." Marbury, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) at 176, 177.
 [*P156]  As judges we take an oath to uphold and defend the constitution.20  That oath must mean something. It should be understood to protect the fundamental rights of our citizens. It means nothing of the sort if its content is dependent on the "humanitarian instincts" or "beliefs" of the judge or panel of judges a litigant happens to draw in a judicial proceeding. No two judges are identical. Each of us possesses a different set of "instincts" and "beliefs." Surely the constitution was not meant to vary from case to case in accordance with the judge or panel assigned to a particular case. To make good on the promise of a written document securing fundamental, permanent rights, the constitution must mean what it originally meant.21 
 [*P157]  I would accordingly reject the "evolving" anti-originalist approach endorsed by the dissent. Instead, I would adopt an interpretation of article I, section 9 rooted in the understanding of this provision that prevailed in the late nineteenth century. For reasons explored below, I would conclude that that understanding does not deputize the courts to second-guess punishments they deem excessive or lacking in proportionality, but only to proscribe methods of punishment historically rejected as barbaric or torturous. I would base that conclusion on the text and structure of article I, section 9; the history and understanding of this provision's federal and state counterparts at the time of its adoption in the late nineteenth century; and the drafting history and post-ratification history of this provision.
1. Text and Structure of Article I, Section 9
 [*P158]  Article I, section 9 provides that "[e]xcessive bail shall not be required; excessive fines shall not be imposed; nor shall cruel and unusual punishments be inflicted." Utah Const. art. I, § 9. The structure and language of this provision cut against an interpretation that would authorize the courts to assess the proportionality of a sentence, and suggest instead an inquiry into the nature or the method of punishment.
 [*P159]  The first cue from the terms of this provision is structural. In its first two clauses, article I, section 9 expressly calls for proportionality review—by proscribing "[e]xcessive bail" and "excessive fines." The essence of excessiveness, after all, is comparison.22  So the prohibition of excessive bail or fines is an express invocation of a principle of proportionality.23 
 [*P160]  Significantly, however, section 9 limits review of a criminal punishment's excessiveness to bail and fines. For punishments, the Utah Constitution (like the Eighth Amendment) says nothing of excessiveness; it prohibits only those punishments that are "cruel and unusual." That is significant. Where three sets of parallel clauses use two distinct formulations, the clear implication is that a difference is intended. The qualifiers "cruel and unusual" would be "an exceedingly vague and oblique way" of communicating what article I, section 9 communicates directly in the two preceding clauses—proportionality. See Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 977, 111 S. Ct. 2680, 115 L. Ed. 2d 836 (1991) (lead opinion of Scalia, J.) (offering a parallel conclusion under the U.S. Constitution).24 
 [*P161]  Clearly "cruel and unusual" is not the same as "excessive." The relevant (nineteenth century) sense of "cruel" is "[d]isposed to give pain," "barbarous." Webster's Common School Dictionary 82 (1892).25  Tellingly, the dissent does not point out any attested usage of the word "cruel" that reflects the notion of proportionality. The same goes for "unusual." In the relevant time period, that term was understood simply as "not usual; uncommon; rare." Id. at 393. Thus, a punishment is "cruel and unusual" if it is rare or uncommon in its barbarousness or tendency to cause pain. That has nothing to do with its proportionality in relation to the underlying offense.
 [*P162]  "Excessive[ness]," on the other hand, is an unmistakable reference to the principle of proportionality. Historically, this term was understood to mean "[b]eyond any given degree, measure or limit, or beyond the common measure or proportion" and "[b]eyond the laws of morality and religion, or beyond the bounds of justice, fitness, propriety, expedience or utility." Webster's American Dictionary of the English Language 314 (3d ed. 1830) (emphasis added); see also Webster's Common School Dictionary 118 (defining "excess" as "intemperance; the amount by which one thing exceeds another"). This underscores the structural point highlighted above. Where article I, section 9 employs a term encompassing proportionality review in two of its clauses but not in the third, the message seems clear: Excessiveness or proportionality review is limited to judicial consideration of bail and fines, and does not extend more broadly to punishments.
 [*P163]  The dissent deems this distinction "unnatural," "incongruous," and "'anomalous.'" Infra ¶ 224 (quoting Solem, 463 U.S. at 289). And, citing cases interpreting the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, the dissent asserts that "[t]he Supreme Court has long held . . . that . . . the Eighth Amendment prohibits disproportionate punishments." Infra ¶ 217 (citing Weems v. United States, 217 U.S. 349, 366, 30 S. Ct. 544, 54 L. Ed. 793 (1910); Solem, 463 U.S. at 290; O'Neil v. Vermont, 144 U.S. 323, 331-32, 339-40, 12 S. Ct. 693, 36 L. Ed. 450 (1892) (Field, J., dissenting)). I disagree on both points. As to precedent, the cases endorsed by the dissent have been called into question more recently. See supra ¶ 134 n.5 (describing the impact of the opinions in Harmelin on the analysis in Solem). The lead opinion in the court's more recent pronouncements under the Eighth Amendment, moreover, persuasively refutes the supposed "anomal[y]" of limiting the excessiveness inquiry to the terms with which it is connected (bail and fines):
The logic of the matter is quite the opposite. If "cruel and unusual punishments" included disproportionate punishments, the separate prohibition of disproportionate fines (which are certainly punishments) would have been entirely superfluous. When two parts of a provision (the Eighth Amendment) use different language to address the same or similar subject matter, a difference in meaning is assumed.
. . . .
But, it might be argued, why would any rational person be careful to forbid the disproportionality of fines but provide no protection against the disproportionality of more severe punishments? Does not the one suggest the existence of the other? Not at all. There is good reason to be concerned that fines, uniquely of all punishments, will be imposed in a measure out of accord with the penal goals of retribution and deterrence. Imprisonment, corporal punishment, and even capital punishment cost a State money; fines are a source of revenue. As we have recognized in the context of other constitutional provisions, it makes sense to scrutinize governmental action more closely when the State stands to benefit.
Harmelin, 501 U.S. at 978 n.9 (lead opinion of Scalia, J.).
 [*P164]  This is entirely in line with our Utah caselaw, which has long embraced the canon of independent meaning (or, in other words, a presumption against superfluous language). See, e.g., Hi-Country Prop. Rights Grp. v. Emmer, 2013 UT 33, ¶ 24, 304 P.3d 851; Vota v. Ohio Copper Co., 42 Utah 129, 129 P. 349, 353 (Utah 1912). Under this canon, the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause should not be presumed to be superfluous. It should be assumed to have independent meaning. And in order to give it such meaning, we must presume that it does more than restate the bar on "excessive fines" in more general terms.
 [*P165]  For these reasons, the language and structure of the Utah Constitution are incompatible with the proportionality standard embraced by the dissent. Instead, the terms of this provision appear to be directed at a standard focused on the question whether a punishment is one that is both "barbarous" or "disposed to give pain" and "uncommon" or "rare."
B. Original Public Meaning of "Cruel and Unusual Punishments"
 [*P166]  This view is confirmed by evidence of the original public meaning of the Utah Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause and of its federal and English antecedents. Article I, section 9 traces its roots to a parallel provision in the U.S. Constitution's Eighth Amendment.26  And the federal provision, in turn, was based on a parallel clause in the English Bill of Rights.
 [*P167]  This background highlights three additional historical sources that inform my understanding of the meaning of article I, section 9: (1) the English origins of the principle of cruel and unusual punishments, (2) the original understanding of the federal Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause, and (3) the understanding prevailing at the time of the adoption of the Utah Constitution. All three sources are incompatible with the principle of proportionality endorsed by the dissent, and point instead toward a prohibition of modes of punishment that are unprecedented in their barbarous nature.
a. The English origins of protection against "cruel and unusual punishments"
 [*P168]  I do not doubt that the "maxim that the punishment must fit the crime" is a matter "foundational" to any "reasoned system of criminal justice." Infra ¶ 214. But the question presented does not concern the wisdom or general applicability of this "venerable principle," infra ¶ 214, as a matter of aspirational public policy. Instead, the question is whether and to what extent this principle is incorporated in the terms of the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. And that question must be answered by reference to the original meaning of the operative terms of the constitution.
 [*P169]  The quest for original meaning is not simply a search for deeply embedded historical values. Again, the premise of originalism is not that a dusty tome is more worthy of respect than a modern one, but that a written constitution is aimed at cementing established principles in place unless and until they are repealed or amended. See supra ¶¶ 148-152. So the venerable historical sources cited in the dissent—see infra ¶¶ 214-15 (quoting the Code of Hammurabi, Leviticus, Plato, and Cicero)—are ultimately beside the point. The fact that sages of centuries past embraced proportionality in sentencing tells us little about the doctrine embedded in the U.S. Constitution in 1789, or the Utah Constitution in 1896. (And, in any event, the quoted provisions speak only to general aspirational policy of proportionality in criminal punishment; we undoubtedly have long embraced that general policy in the United States, but that doesn't mean that our constitutional law requires our judges to enforce such a principle as against legislatively endorsed punishments.)
 [*P170]  To derive an original understanding of the constitution, we must consider its text and legal underpinnings. The Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause borrows terms and concepts from the English Bill of Rights. Compare An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject and Settling the Succession of the Crown, 1 W. & M., 2d sess., ch. 2 (Dec. 16, 1689) ("That excessive bail ought not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted."), with U.S. Const. amend. VIII ("Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted."). So the starting point for any historical study of the Eighth Amendment is an inquiry into the understanding of that provision that prevailed historically.
 [*P171]  In its initial invocations of the principle of proportionality, the United States Supreme Court proceeded in open disdain for the original meaning of the Eighth Amendment. In Weems v. United States, for example, the Court openly acknowledged that it was embracing a "progressive" legal standard that was "not fastened to the obsolete." 217 U.S. at 378. Thus, far from attempting to connect up its view with original meaning, the Weems Court endorsed a principle that could "acquire meaning as public opinion becomes enlightened by a humane justice." Id. Trop v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86, 78 S. Ct. 590, 2 L. Ed. 2d 630 (1958), is to the same effect. There the Court formulated the principle endorsed by the dissent in this case—a proportionality inquiry rooted in "evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society." Infra ¶ 213 (quoting Trop, 356 U.S. at 101).
 [*P172]  More recent decisions give at least a nod to history. In Solem v. Helm, a majority of the Supreme Court purported to base its standard of proportionality on an original understanding of the Eighth Amendment. 463 U.S. at 284; see infra ¶ 218 (citing Solem for the proposition that "the Eighth Amendment's explicit prohibitions of '[e]xcessive bail' and 'excessive fines' must extend to bar excessive terms of imprisonment"). But the Solem court's textual and historical analysis was sparse. While invoking the English Bill of Rights, the Solem court gave no consideration to that provision's differential treatment of "bail" and "fines," on one hand, and "punishments inflicted," on the other. Nor did it examine historical practice in England under this provision in pursuit of any serious assessment of the question whether the standard of excessiveness (as applied to bail and fines) had been extended more broadly to "punishments." Instead, the Solem court simply cited historical precedent of the English courts in condemning "a 'fine of thirty thousand pounds'" as "'excessive and exorbitant.'" 463 U.S. at 285 (emphasis added) (quoting Earl of Devon's Case, 11 State Trials 133, 136 (1689)). And, from there, the Solem court blithely asserted that the Eighth Amendment must have "adopted the English principle of proportionality," which it presumed would extend to punishments in the form of prison sentences. Id. at 285-86.
 [*P173]  The Solem majority, like the dissent in this case, infra ¶ 215, also cited Blackstone in support of its conclusion that the Eighth Amendment incorporated a principle of proportionality. Id. at 285. Yet although it is true that Blackstone favored a principle under which the designated "'punishment ought always to be proportioned to the particular purpose it is meant to serve,'" infra ¶ 215 (quoting 4 William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England *12 (facsimile ed. 1979) (1765-69)), the quoted provisions simply articulated aspirational legislative policy. See 4 Blackstone, supra at *11 (indicating Blackstone's intent simply "to suggest a few hints for the consideration of such as are, or may hereafter become, legislators"). They do not purport to limit the discretion of the legislature or to indicate that the legislature might lack the power to impose a sentence that a court might later deem to be excessive or disproportionate. To the contrary, Blackstone went out of his way to emphasize the "right of the legislature in any country to [e]nforce it[]s own laws by the death of the transgressor." Id. And he even highlighted a key element of the case against judicial enforcement of a constitutional principle of proportionality—asserting that "the quantity of punishment can never be absolutely determined by any standing invariable rule; but it must be left to the arbitration of the legislature to inflict such penalties as are warranted by the laws of nature and society, and such as appear to be the best calculated to answer the end of precaution against future offences." Id. at *12.
 [*P174]  These and other shortcomings of the originalist case for an Eighth Amendment principle of proportionality were highlighted in the lead opinion in Harmelin v. Michigan. In Harmelin, the lead opinion chides the Solem majority for "assum[ing], with no analysis" that the English Declaration of Rights' prohibition on "excessive" bail and fines extended also to "punishments." 501 U.S. at 967. And, citing the "historical context and contemporaneous understanding of the English guarantee," the Harmelin opinion concludes that the excessiveness limitation was historically understood to be limited to bail and fines, and that the restriction on "punishments" was defined by what was "cruel and unusual" in the sense of a form of punishment aimed at inflicting pain ("cruel") and also contrary to precedent ("unusual").
 [*P175]  The Harmelin opinion's basis for this conclusion was the 1685 case of Titus Oates, which was decided the year after the adoption of the English Bill of Rights. Oates was a "Protestant cleric whose false accusations had caused the execution of 15 prominent Catholics for allegedly organizing a 'Popish Plot' to overthrow King Charles II in 1679." Id. at 969. Oates was "tried and convicted before the King's Bench for perjury." Id. His crime, of "bearing false witness against another, with an express premeditated design to take away his life, so as the innocent person be condemned and executed,' had, at one time, been treated as a species of murder, and punished with death." Id. at 969-70. Yet
[a]t sentencing, [Lord Chief Justice] Jeffreys complained that death was no longer available as a penalty and lamented that "a proportionable punishment of that crime can scarce by our law, as it now stands, be inflicted upon him." Second Trial of Titus Oates, 10 How. St. Tr. 1227, 1314 (K.B. 1685). The law would not stand in the way, however. The judges met, and, according to Jeffreys, were in unanimous agreement that "crimes of this nature are left to be punished according to the discretion of this court, so far as that the judgment extend not to life or member." Ibid. Another justice taunted Oates that "we have taken special care of you," id., at 1316. The court then decreed that he should pay a fine of "1000 marks upon each Indictment," that he should be "stript of [his] Canonical Habits," that he should stand in the pillory annually at certain specified times and places, that on May 20 he should be whipped by "the common hangman" "from Aldgate to Newgate," that he should be similarly whipped on May 22 "from Newgate to Tyburn," and that he should be imprisoned for life. Ibid.
Harmelin, 501 U.S. at 970 (third alteration in original).
 [*P176]  Oates challenged his sentence in the House of Lords, and the Lords' opinions form the basis of the Harmelin opinion's sense of the content of the English Bill of Rights' protection against "cruell and unusuall Punishments." Id. "'Not a single peer ventured to affirm that the judgment was legal: but much was said about the odious character of the appellant,' and the Lords affirmed the judgment." Id. "A minority of the Lords dissented, however, and their statement sheds light on the meaning of the 'cruell and unusual Punishments' clause." Id. Specifically, as the lead opinion in Harmelin indicated, the dissenting Lords asserted that the King's Bench, "'being a Temporal Court,'" had no authority to divest Oates "'of his canonical and priestly Habit'"; that there was "'no Precedent to warrant the Punishments of whipping and committing to Prison for Life, for the Crime of Perjury'"; and that "'said Judgments were contrary to Law and ancient Practice,'" and thus "contrary to the Declaration . . . that excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor excessive Fines imposed, nor cruel nor unusual Punishments afflicted.'" Id. at 971.
 [*P177]  In further support of this understanding of the English Bill of Rights proscription on cruel and unusual punishments, the Harmelin opinion also quoted from the discussion in connection with a bill passed by the House of Commons, which would have annulled Oates's sentence. Id. That discussion again "confirm[ed] that the 'cruell and unusuall Punishments' clause was directed at the Oates case (among others) in particular, and at illegality, rather than disproportionality, of punishment in general." Id. "In all these contemporaneous discussions," the Harmelin opinion noted that "a punishment [was] not considered objectionable because it [was] disproportionate, but because it [was] 'out of the [Judges'] Power,' contrary to Law and ancient practice,' without 'Precedents' or 'express Law to warrant,' 'unusual,' 'illegal,' or imposed by 'Pretence to a discretionary Power.'" Id. "Moreover," the opinion noted that "the phrase 'cruell and unusuall' [was] treated as interchangeable with 'cruel and illegal,'" such that "the 'illegal and cruell Punishments' of the Declaration's prologue . . . are the same thing as the 'cruell and unusual Punishments' of its body." Id. at 973 (fourth alteration in original).
 [*P178]  The dissent takes issue with this description of the history of Oates's trial, highlighting statements in the House of Lords that all thought "such an extravagant Judgment ought not to have been given, or a Punishment so exorbitant inflicted on an English Subject," or in the House of Commons that members described the sentence as "excessive" and "extravagant." Infra ¶ 234. It also cites the work of one legal scholar who has concluded, in part based upon his reading of the Oates materials, that the "English Cruell and Unusuall Punishments Clause was originally understood to prohibit new punishments that were excessive in light of prior practice." Infra ¶ 233 (quoting John F. Stinneford, Rethinking Proportionality Under the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause, 97 Va. L. Rev. 899, 937 (2011)). There are several problems with the dissent's take on the Oates case.
 [*P179]  First, it is not true that Oates's punishment was "unprecedented in its severity," as the dissent puts it. Infra ¶ 234. It is simply not the case that parts of Oates's sentence (like the flogging that would probably have resulted in death) would have been seen as disproportionate to his crime—perjury with the intent (and the result) of having fifteen innocent people executed. See Harmelin, 501 U.S. at 973 n.4 (Scalia, J.); see also Anthony F. Granucci, "Nor Cruel and Unusual Punishments Inflicted:" The Original Meaning, 57 Calif. L. Rev. 839, 859 n.97 (1969) (citing 4 The Diary of John Evelyn 445 (E. DeBeer ed. 1955) (noting contemporary opinion that Oates's "punishment was but what he well deserved")); 3 Thomas Babington Macaulay, The History of England From the Accession of James II 304 (1898) (noting that Oates's "sufferings, great as they might seem, had been trifling when compared with his crimes"). Indeed, the reason Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys complained that "a proportionable punishment of that crime can scarce by our law, as it now stands, be inflicted upon [Oates]," Second Trial of Titus Oates, 10 How. St. Tr. 1227, 1314 (K.B. 1685), is that the crime of which Oates was convicted used to be punishable by death. See 4 Blackstone, supra at *196 (noting that under "the antient [sic] common law" it was "a species of killing held to be murder" to "bear[] false witness against another, with an express premeditated design to take away his life, so as the innocent person be condemned and executed"). But such punishment was discontinued and had no statutory authorization. Thus, the problem with Oates's sentence, in the view of the dissenting Lords and the House of Commons, was its unusualness or illegality.
 [*P180]  Second, the Lords' and Commons' references to "excessive[ness]" may well have referred to the 2,000 marks Oates was fined, an amount that "may have been excessive" for the time period, Granucci, supra at 859, and which was undoubtedly subject to the Excessive Fines Clause of the English Bill of Rights. See Earl of Devon's Case, 11 State Trials 133, 136 (1689) (condemning a "fine of thirty thousand pounds" as "excessive and exorbitant.").
 [*P181]  Finally, scholars and courts have overwhelmingly acknowledged that historical "English practice" was generally incompatible with a principle of proportionality.27  After all, "in 1791, England punished over 200 crimes with death," and even in 1830 the "class of offenses punishable by death" encompassed "murder; attempts to murder by poisoning, stubbing, shooting etc.; administering poison to procure abortion; sodomy; rape; statutory rape, and certain classes of forgery."28 
 [*P182]  Thus, the more careful analysis of the English origins of the Eighth Amendment indicates an understanding in line with the terms and structure of article I, section 9—that it did not impose a principle of proportionality, but only a limitation on "cruel" forms of punishment that were "unusual" in the sense of being unauthorized by past precedent.
b. Original understanding of the Eighth Amendment
 [*P183]  This conclusion is also confirmed by the practice and debate that prevailed in the United States at or around the time of the federal framing. In state conventions leading to the ratification of the United States Constitution, for example, an objection was raised that the Constitution (then without a Bill of Rights) "nowhere restrained" Congress "from inventing the most cruel and unheard-of punishments, and annexing them to crimes." 2 Jonathan Elliot, Debates of the Federal Constitution 111 (2d ed. 1854). And, in context, the reference to such "cruel and unheard-of punishments" was not about proportionality, but about form—a concern that without such a "constitutional check," Congress might be inclined to turn to cruel punishments such as "racks and gibbets," which "may be amongst the most mild instruments" imaginable. Id.29 
 [*P184]  "The actions of the First Congress, which are of course persuasive evidence of what the Constitution means, belie any doctrine of proportionality." Harmelin, 501 U.S. at 980 (opinion of Scalia, J.) (citation omitted). After all, "[s]hortly after proposing the Bill of Rights, the First Congress" extended the punishment of "death by hanging" on a range of crimes, including "forgery of United States securities, 'run[ning] away with [a] ship or vessel, or any goods or merchandise to the value of fifty dollars,' treason, and murder on the high seas." Id. at 980-81 (second and third alterations in original) (quoting 1 Stat. 114). Significantly, "[t]he law books of the time are devoid of indication that anyone considered these newly enacted penalties unconstitutional by virtue of their disproportionality." Id. at 981.
 [*P185]  Early American legal commentary is along the same lines. One commentator spoke of "[t]he prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments" as "mark[ing] the improved spirit of the age, which would not tolerate the use of the rack or stake, or any of those horrid modes of torture, devised by human ingenuity for the gratification of fiendish passion." James Bayard, A Brief Exposition of the Constitution of the United States 154 (2d ed. 1840). Another spoke of the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause as prohibiting "[t]he various barbarous and cruel punishments inflicted under the laws of some other countries," such as "[b]reaking on the wheel, flaying alive, rendering asunder with horses, [and] various species of horrible tortures inflicted in the inquisition," such as "maiming, mutilating and scourging to death." Benjamin L. Oliver, The Rights of an American Citizen 186 (1832).30 
 [*P186]  This commentary confirms what is indicated by the other historical sources cited above: The federal Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause was widely understood not to prescribe an assessment of proportionality, but simply to prohibit modes of punishment that were "cruel" in the sense of being barbaric and "unusual" in the sense of being unprecedented.
c. The public understanding at the time of the Utah framing
 [*P187]  This same understanding of "cruel and unusual punishments" prevailed at the time of the framing of the Utah Constitution. Thus, even if there were doubt about the original meaning of the federal Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause, the question presented here would yield a straightforward answer: Article I, section 9, as originally adopted in 1896, is not a license for judicial assessment of the proportionality of criminal punishment; it is merely a prohibition of modes of punishment that are unprecedented in their barbarousness or tendency to inflict pain.
 [*P188]  State and federal courts consistently conceived of the constitutional prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments in this way,31  often expressly rejecting the type of proportionality analysis advocated by the dissent.32  Throughout the nineteenth century, the courts generally understood the prohibition of "cruel and unusual punishments" as a limitation on barbaric methods of punishment, while emphasizing that the length of a prison term was a matter for legislative discretion.33  In the words of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, "[t]he question whether the punishment is too severe, and disproportionate to the offense, is for the legislature to determine."34 
 [*P189]  This view prevailed throughout the nineteenth century, including in the decade in which our Utah Constitution was adopted. An exemplary decision was Hobbs v. State, 133 Ind. 404, 32 N.E. 1019 (Ind. 1893). In that case, the Indiana Supreme Court explained that "[t]he word 'cruel,' when considered in relation to the time when it found place in the bill of rights, meant, not a fine or imprisonment, or both, but such as that inflicted at the whipping post, in the pillory, burning at the stake, breaking on the wheel, etc." Id. at 1021. And, importantly, the Hobbs court went on to conclude that the prohibition of "cruel and unusual punishments" "does not affect legislation providing imprisonment for life or for years." Id.35 
 [*P190]  This same approach was reflected in legal commentary in the era. "Punishments" were understood as "cruel when they involve[d] torture or a lingering death." 3 Bouvier's Law Dictionary 2771 (8th ed. 1914). On the question of "[w]hat punishment is suited to a specified offence," moreover, the prevailing view was that that matter "must in general be determined by the legislature." Id. Thus, a "[s]entence for a term not exceeding that prescribed by statute" was not "regarded as a cruel or unusual punishment." Id.
 [*P191]  It may be a bit of an overstatement to say that the nineteenth-century view of the courts on this point was "universal." See Harmelin, 501 U.S. at 984 (opinion of Scalia, J.) (articulating this view); Weems, 217 U.S. at 402 (White, J., dissenting) (same). At or around the time the Utah Constitution was adopted, some courts had endorsed the view that the constitutional prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments encompassed a standard of review for proportionality of prison terms.36  And at least a couple of legal treatises had begun to embrace this view.37  But in light of the extensive authority cited above, this approach would surely have been seen by our Utah framers as aberrational.
 [*P192]  The dissent disagrees, asserting that "the preponderance" of courts in the nineteenth century adopted the approach it takes today. Infra ¶ 244. But in so concluding, the dissent ignores—or at least fails to refute or distinguish—a significant segment of the body of cases cited above. See supra ¶¶ 188-89 & nn.31-35. And in any event the authority it cites does not support this conclusion. Before the dissenting opinion in O'Neil (1892) and then the majority in Weems (1910), the United States Supreme Court had never endorsed proportionality review under the Eighth Amendment. Weems and subsequent Supreme Court caselaw recognize as much. Weems, 217 U.S. at 378 (basing its holding on a "progressive" legal standard "not fastened to the obsolete" but "acquir[ing] meaning as public opinion becomes enlightened by a humane justice"); Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, at 265-66, 92 S. Ct. 2726, 33 L. Ed. 2d 346 (1972) (Brennan, J., concurring) ("Had this historical interpretation of the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause prevailed, the Clause would have been effectively read out of the Bill of Rights. . . . But this Court in Weems decisively repudiated the historical interpretation of the Clause" (internal quotation marks omitted)); id. at 322-25 (Marshall, J., concurring) (concluding that "the history of the clause clearly establishes that it was intended to prohibit cruel punishments," and then noting the tide-change in Eighth Amendment law instigated by the O'Neil dissent and the Weems majority (emphasis added)). The dissent's reading of relevant caselaw prior to Weems is, in my view, in error.
 [*P193]  The dissent derides my reading of Pervear as "unduly strained" and somehow meant to sustain the proposition that the Supreme Court "was proclaiming the punishments imposed by statute to be immune from constitutional review." Supra ¶ 239. First, I am not claiming that a legislative enactment can never be cruel and unusual. And no court ever held any such thing.38  Instead, my point is simply that the prohibition on "cruel and unusual punishments" goes to the barbarousness or torturousness of the punishment, and not to the length of the term of confinement. Second, my reading of Pervear is hardly "strained"; the Court in that case did hold that "[t]he mode adopted" to punish a crime "is wholly within the discretion of State legislatures." Pervear, 72 U.S. at 480. Third, it is the dissent that stretches the scope of Pervear beyond what it bears by concluding that the Court "implicitly recognized its understanding that excessive punishments may be cruel and unusual punishments." Infra ¶ 238. There is little question why the Court indicated that it "perceive[d] nothing excessive, or cruel, or unusual" in Pervear's sentence. Pervear, 72 U.S. at 480. Pervear had argued that the "fines and penalties imposed and inflicted by the State law" were "excessive, cruel, and unusual." Id. at 479 (emphasis added). And because the Eighth Amendment expressly prohibits "excessive fines," the quoted language in Pervear is simply a nod to the distinction between bail and fines on the one hand and punishments on the other.39 
 [*P194]  Of the various cases cited by the dissent purportedly establishing the authority of the judiciary to overturn a disproportionate sentence, only two of them actually overturned a prisoner's sentence. See State ex rel. Garvey v. Whitaker, 48 La. Ann. 527, 19 So. 457 (La. 1896); State v. Driver, 78 N.C. 423 (1878). Of the others, moreover, none are of any material aid to its thesis. At least one of the cited cases appears to be applying proportionality analysis to a fine,40  which is expressly subject to the Excessive Fines Clause. And in other cases, the courts ultimately upheld the sentence under review and alluded to proportionality only as a matter of arguendo dicta. In McDonald v. Commonwealth, for example, the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts merely allowed that "it is possible that imprisonment in the state prison for a long term of years might be so disproportionate to the offense as to constitute a cruel and unusual punishment," while ultimately upholding the sentence in question. 173 Mass. 322, 53 N.E. 874, 875 (Mass. 1899) (emphasis added).41  The Vermont Supreme Court's approach in State v. Four Jugs of Intoxicating Liquor is along similar lines. 58 Vt. 140, 2 A. 586 (Vt. 1886). There the court simply acknowledged that "[i]f the penalty were unreasonably severe for a single offense, the constitutional question might be urged," again while upholding the sentence in question. Id. at 593 (second emphasis added).
 [*P195]  And finally, other cases cited by the dissent cut sharply against its position—notwithstanding the dissent's attempts to discredit them. People v. Smith, 94 Mich. 644, 54 N.W. 487 (Mich. 1893), unequivocally stated that "the legislature alone" had "the power to fix the minimum and maximum of the punishment for all crimes." Id. at 488. The dissent views this decision as undermined by a case handed down "just two years later"—People v. Whitney, 105 Mich. 622, 63 N.W. 765, 766 (Mich. 1895). Infra ¶ 246. But the Whitney court's reference to "cases" that "might arise when the punishment imposed by an act is so cruel and unusual that the courts would interfere and protect the rights of the party," id., is entirely consistent with the original meaning of the principle of cruel and unusual punishments as I understand it. The referenced "cases," after all, could easily be aimed at encompassing the imposition of barbarous modes of punishment.
 [*P196]  Aldridge v. Commonwealth, 4 Va. (2 Va. Cas.) 447, 449 (Va. Gen. Ct. 1824), also undermines the dissent's view. And the case cannot properly be dismissed on the "racial animus" grounds charged by the dissent. Infra ¶¶ 248-49. Granted, an element of the Aldridge court's analysis was based on the notion that the Bill of Rights did not apply to African Americans. Aldridge, 4 Va. at 449. But the court also articulated an alternative—and legitimate—ground: It expressly held that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause "[had no] bearing on th[e] case" because the provision did not "control the right to determine . . . the adequacy of the punishment, but [wa]s merely applicable to the modes of punishment." Id. at 450. And, in the subsequent case of Commonwealth v. Wyatt, 27 Va. (6 Rand.) 694 (Gen. Ct. 1828), it is simply not true—as the dissent charges—that the court held that "sentencing judges were constitutionally restrained from sentencing an individual to an excessive number of stripes." Infra ¶ 249. Instead, the court concluded that "[t]he punishment of offences by stripes is certainly odious, but cannot be said to be unusual." Wyatt, 27 Va. at 701. Thus, as far as the discretion of the lower court went, it was restrained by "the discretion always exercised by Common Law Courts to inflict fine and imprisonment." Id. Accordingly, in the same way that Titus Oates's sentence of flogging multiple times (such that he was effectively sentenced to death for a noncapital crime) was illegal (unauthorized by statute or common law), so too would a Virginia judge be constrained in sentencing someone who operated an illegal card game from being lashed so many times that he was effectively sentenced to "death produced by the most cruel torture." Id. at 700. This analysis is entirely consistent with the approach outlined in this opinion. The court confirmed that the constitutional restraint was on the mode and legality of the punishment and sentence, not a subjective assessment of proportionality.
 [*P197]  Further support for this view can be found in the most prominent cruel and unusual punishment case out of Utah in the late nineteenth century, People v. Wilkinson, 2 Utah 158 (Utah Terr. 1877), aff'd sub nom Wilkerson v. Utah, 99 U.S. 130, 136, 25 L. Ed. 345 (1878). This case arose out of a conviction of first-degree murder and a sentence of death. The issue on appeal concerned the legality of the sentence of death—specifically, the proviso imposed by the trial judge that Wilkinson be executed by being "publicly shot." 2 Utah at 159. In challenging that sentence, Wilkinson asserted that the judge's determination of the "mode" of execution was a violation of Utah territorial statutes, the common law, and the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. On that latter point, the Territorial Supreme Court affirmed, in terms in line with the approach set forth above:
The question . . . presents itself: "Is the manner designated in the case before us, that of death by shooting, a cruel and unusual punishment?" We do not think the appellant so considers it, nor do we think he could. It is the mode adopted for the army in enforcing discipline; it is a mode recognized and practised in other civilized countries to enforce criminal laws; and, as we have seen, it was approved by express statute of this Territory for nearly a quarter of a century, and as history tells us, it is the manner of death of which criminals in this Territory made choice in preference to other modes, such as hanging and beheading. That manner cannot be cruel which criminals prefer, and that cannot be unusual which is often adopted.
Id. at 164.
 [*P198]  The Wilkinson court's approach is entirely in line with the historically accepted view outlined above. Instead of assessing the proportionality or excessiveness of the punishment, the Wilkinson court's analysis deems the element of "cruel[ty]" to go to the "manner" of punishment, and that of "unusual[ness]" to be addressed to the extent to which a punishment is "adopted" by law and common practice.
 [*P199]  The United States Supreme Court's decision affirming the Territorial Supreme Court is even clearer. Far from assessing proportionality or excessiveness, the Supreme Court directed its consideration of "cruelty" to methods of punishment involving "torture," or in other words "terror, pain, or disgrace." Wilkerson, 99 U.S. at 135. Thus, in affirming the sentence of death by firing squad, the Supreme Court made reference to modes of barbarous punishment such as "where the prisoner was drawn or dragged to the place of execution," or "where he was embowelled alive, beheaded, and quartered." Id. And in conceptualizing "the extent of the constitutional provision which provides that cruel and unusual punishments shall not be inflicted," the Supreme Court held "that punishments of torture . . . and all others in the same line of unnecessary cruelty, are forbidden by that emendment [sic] to the Constitution." Id. at 136. Because "[n]othing of the kind" was involved in this case, the Supreme Court affirmed, rejecting "the theory . . . that the court possessed no authority to prescribe the mode of execution" while holding that "death by shooting" was by no means cruel and unusual punishment. Id. at 136-37.
 [*P200]  I suppose it's true that the Wilkerson decision did not "define with exactness the [full] extent" of the Eighth Amendment, but held only that "punishments of torture . . . are forbidden" by it. Infra ¶ 242 (quoting Wilkerson, 99 U.S. at 136). But the quoted statements are the sum and substance of the court's analysis of the Eighth Amendment, and they make no reference to proportionality. And in any event, any doubts about Wilkerson were resolved in In re Kemmler, 136 U.S. 436, 10 S. Ct. 930, 34 L. Ed. 519 (1890), which unequivocally held that "[p]unishments are cruel when they involve torture or a lingering death; but the punishment of death is not cruel within the meaning of that word as used in the constitution. It implies something inhuman and barbarous,—something more than the mere extinguishment of life." Id. at 447 (emphasis added).
 [*P201]  This was the prevailing public understanding of "cruel and unusual punishments" at the time of the framing of the Utah Constitution. As the author of the dissenting opinion today opined previously, "[l]egal scholars and jurists continued to accept this understanding of the phrase ['cruel and unusual'] throughout the nineteenth century despite occasional attempts to expand the cruel and unusual punishments clause to prohibit punishments deemed disproportionate to the crime." State v. Gardner, 947 P.2d 630, 636 (Utah 1997) (Durham, J., plurality opinion) (citing Granucci, supra at 842). At that time a few isolated judges and commentators had alluded to a theory of constitutional review for proportionality, but the overwhelming majority view was to the contrary—foreclosing only those barbarous methods of punishment rejected by law and common practice. And the majority approach had been endorsed by our Territorial Supreme Court in an opinion affirmed by the U.S. Supreme Court.
3. History of Article I, Section 9
 [*P202]  The history of article I, section 9 supports this same construction. As the dissent indicates, proposed constitutions for the State of Deseret (a series of them, from 1849 to 1872) broadly provided that "[a]ll penalties and punishments shall be in proportion to the offence." Deseret Const. art. VII, § 8; infra ¶ 216. But this general proviso never became law. By the time we became a state, the people of Utah had abandoned the broad principle of proportionality in the proposed Deseret constitutions. They adopted instead a provision that limits the excessiveness inquiry to the imposition of bail and fines. See Utah Const. art. I, § 9.
 [*P203]  The dissent interprets this drafting history to preserve a broad principle of proportionality. See infra ¶¶ 216-17 & n.1. I see no basis for that conclusion. In light of the plain language of article I, section 9, I see no way to conclude that our constitution embraced a broad principle of proportionality for "all penalties and punishments." Instead, I would interpret this provision as repudiating the general principle and replacing it with a more limited standard (restricting review for excessiveness to bail and fines).
 [*P204]  Other state constitutions—including many in place at the time of the founding of this state—embrace the formulation in the proposed Deseret provision.42  Many of those provisions expressly require proportionality in punishment in addition to prohibiting the "cruel and unusual." And courts interpreted them in accordance with their terms. In State v. Woodward, 68 W. Va. 66, 69 S.E. 385 (W. Va. 1910), for example, the West Virginia Supreme Court concluded that its Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause did "not affect legislation providing imprisonment for life or years," but applied only to "inhuman, barbarous inflictions." Id. at 388-89. Yet the court then went on to examine the propriety of a six month to one year prison sentence for violations of "Sunday" laws, noting the West Virginia Constitution commanded that "[p]enalties shall be proportioned to the character and degree of the offense." Id. at 389. Significantly, the court emphasized that this provision did not "refer to the mode of punishment, but to the degree, extent, and quality." Id.43  With that background, the terms of article I, section 9 as adopted are telling.
 [*P205]  The formulation in other state constitutions—separately requiring that "[a]ll penalties . . . be proportioned to the nature of the offense" and prohibiting "cruel and unusual punishments"—presupposes that the two provisions have independent meaning. See, e.g., Hi-Country Prop. Rights Grp. v. Emmer, 2013 UT 33, ¶ 24, 304 P.3d 851 (interpreting statute "under the presumption of independent meaning (and/or its converse, the presumption against surplusage)"); Vota v. Ohio Copper Co., 42 Utah 129, 129 P. 349, 353 (Utah 1912) ("It is our duty to give effect to every word or phrase contained in [a] statute. . . ."). That alone suggests that the prohibition of "cruel and unusual punishments" is something other than a requirement of proportionality. It also indicates, by implication, that the framers of the Utah Constitution rejected a principle of proportionality when they declined to include the proportionality provision in article I, section 9.
 [*P206]  I suppose it is conceivable that the framers of the Utah Constitution were aware of the outlier cases identified above—cases embracing proportionality review as an element of the constitutional prohibition of cruel and unusual punishments. See supra ¶ 194 & n.40. But the text our framers adopted strikes me as a highly unlikely mode of embracing this aberrational theory. And if they had intended to buck the prevailing view in other jurisdictions operating under parallel clauses, it seems likely they would have addressed the matter openly in debate—as they did on other such points of dispute.44  Yet the record of the constitutional convention is silent on article I, section 9. That is significant. It suggests, all other things being equal, that our framers were endorsing the prevailing approach to "cruel and unusual punishments," and were not embracing a burgeoning theory of proportionality.
 [*P207]  That conclusion is confirmed by the post-ratification history of this provision in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Weems. The Weems decision was the U.S. Supreme Court's first articulation of a principle of proportionality under the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 217 U.S. at 380-81. As the popular reaction to Weems indicates, however, that decision was hardly viewed as confirming an established view of "cruel and unusual punishments." Instead, Weems was seen as working an innovation in constitutional law. And the reaction in Utah and elsewhere thoroughly undermines the view that the concept of "cruel and unusual punishments" was historically understood to encompass a principle of proportionality.
 [*P208]  Local newspaper reports of the Weems decision in Utah noted "agitat[ion] over the action of the supreme court of the United States in inaugurating what is designated as a new era in the punishment of criminals—that of requiring punishment to be proportionate to the offense." New Era in Criminal Penology Commences, Salt Lake Herald, at 1 (May 9, 1910) (emphasis added).45  That account is impossible to square with the notion of "cruel and unusual punishments" incorporating a longstanding principle of proportionality. If the generation that witnessed the framing of the Utah Constitution viewed the Weems decision as "inaugurating a new era . . . in the punishment of criminals," they certainly would not have viewed article I, section 9 as embracing that principle.46 
 [*P209]  At least one other data point cements this conclusion in the specific context of a claim like Houston's (challenging the imposition of a sentence of life without parole on a juvenile): At the time of the framing of the Utah Constitution and for many years thereafter, a juvenile convicted of murder47  would have been subject to either the death penalty or to life in prison without the possibility of parole.48  This well-established, widely applicable sentencing scheme renders Houston's claim of unconstitutionality highly questionable. Because our founding-era justice system clearly and expressly required a juvenile convicted of murder to be sentenced to a life-without-parole sentence or worse, I find it difficult to believe that such sentence would have been viewed as "cruel and unusual" at the time of our founding.49  [JMC1]
c. Houston's Article I, Section 9 Claim
 [*P210]  For all of the above reasons, the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause of the Utah Constitution bars only those methods of punishment that are "cruel" in the sense of being barbaric or torturous and "unusual" in the sense of being contrary to law and longstanding practice. Houston's state constitutional claim fails under this standard.
 [*P211]  Houston does not—and cannot—complain about any torturous or barbarous form of punishment. His claim, instead, goes to the alleged excessiveness of his prison term. He alleges, specifically, that his "immaturity, vulnerability, impetuosity, and underdeveloped character render him less culpable than an adult with fully developed brain and value systems," and as a result his sentence constitutes "disproportionate punishment."
 [*P212]  This is not a cognizable constitutional claim under article I, section 9. Because Houston challenges only the excessiveness of his prison term, he has not asserted a claim under the Utah Constitution as originally understood. I would reject that claim on that basis.
