
 [*P39]  I share some of the majority's discomfort with statements made by the prosecutor during closing argument. The prosecutor's allusion to abuse of the victim's mother seems to have run afoul of the district court's in limine ruling. But defense counsel made no objection to these statements. And because the lack of an objection could easily have been strategic (to avoid highlighting, or turning vague allusions into significant issues), I find no room in the deferential Strickland standard for reversal on ineffective assistance of counsel grounds.
 [*P40]  The majority does not appear to challenge this premise (of a strategic basis for defense counsel's silence). But it concludes that counsel's strategic basis was not a sound one given the "extremely prejudicial nature"  of the prosecutor's remarks. Supra ¶ 20. And it offers a number of grounds for avoiding the usual implication of a strategic basis for the lack of an objection by trial counsel (which is the failure of the ineffective assistance claim under Strickland)—in asserting, for example, that endorsing this strategy would cripple Strickland-based challenges to prosecutorial misconduct, or would allow prosecutors to "engage in improper conduct without consequence." Supra ¶¶ 30-31.
 [*P41]  I respectfully dissent. The majority's premise (that the comments were "extremely prejudicial") is overstated. And the resulting conclusion (that the strategy should be rejected) is unfaithful to Strickland. I would affirm under Strickland, as I read that precedent to foreclose the argument endorsed by the majority.
 [*P42]  I would also reject Larrabee's alternative ground for reversal—his notion of error under a so-called doctrine of prosecutorial misconduct. Notwithstanding some dicta in our case law, I find no constitutional or statutory authority for our independent review of the record for an assessment of "prosecutorial misconduct." An appellate court wields only the judicial power afforded by law, and that power is limited to the review of lower-court decisions for error. And with that proper focus (on error), Larrabee's argument fails, as there is no room for a finding of plain error in the district court's failure to interject itself into the proceedings sua sponte.1 
I. INEFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL
 [*P43]  Like the majority, I am troubled by the challenged statements made by the prosecutor in closing argument. The prosecutor's reference to Larrabee's alleged past abuse of the victim's mother ran afoul of the court's ruling in limine. An objection could certainly have been made, and probably should have been sustained.
 [*P44]  But of course there was no objection, and as the majority properly concludes, Larrabee cannot be deemed to have preserved an objection by filing a motion to arrest judgment. Supra ¶ 16. And once we reach that conclusion, the question for our review is limited to the Strickland analysis of Larrabee's ineffective assistance of counsel claim. I would analyze that question directly—without the distraction of a subjective assessment of whether the prosecution crossed some ill-defined  line of "misconduct." Supra ¶ 33. And I would affirm on the ground that there is an easily defensible strategic basis for defense counsel's failure to object to the problematic statement made by the prosecutor in closing argument. In so doing, I would also reject the majority's grounds for avoiding that conclusion.
 A. Strategic Grounds For Counsel's Alleged Failings
 [*P45]  The strategic grounds for forgoing an objection in this case are straightforward. The prosecutor's allusion to Larrabee's possible—or hypothetical—abuse of the victim's mother (Jamie) were objectionable. But in my view the majority overstates things in repeatedly characterizing them as "extremely prejudicial" or "inflammatory and prejudicial." Supra ¶¶ 20, 22-23. These statements appear to refer to a matter ruled out of bounds on a ruling in limine—the matter of Jamie's allegation that she was sexually abused by Larrabee.2  And for that reason any objection on this matter should properly have been sustained. See supra ¶ 27. But again an objection might easily have done more harm than good, and it was accordingly within counsel's strategic judgment to stand pat instead of calling attention to the matter.
 [*P46]  The prosecutor's allusion to abuse of Jamie was in the context of a response to defense counsel's argument that Jamie "had it in for" Larrabee and thus had a motive to fabricate the charge of sexual abuse. If Jamie had truly hated Larrabee, she would, in the prosecutor's view, have sought to vindicate her hatred at a time when Larrabee was still involved in her life. It was in advancing this argument that the prosecutor asked "[w]hen he's dragging [Jamie] back to the house in Arizona, how come she doesn't scream and say look what he's doing to me? He's sexually abusing me. He's doing all these things. . . . Why didn't she have the vengeance then? Why does she wait until she's not in his life at all?" In this context, the problematic import of the reference to abuse of Jamie was relatively minor.3  It could be understood as a mere hypothetical—as attempting to undermine the prosecution's motive-to-fabricate theory by suggesting that Jamie's alleged hatred could have caused her to fabricate something as outrageous and unfounded as abuse of Jamie.
 [*P47]  It could also have been understood as more pernicious. And I do not deny that the reference crossed a line drawn by the judge in her ruling in limine. But that is not the question. The question is whether counsel could have had a strategic basis for standing pat instead of asserting an objection. The answer to that question strikes me as clear. In light of the vague, arguably hypothetical nature of the allusion to abuse of Jamie, an objection could easily have done more harm than good.4  It could have caused the jury to ruminate more extensively about the possibility of actual (not hypothetical) abuse by Larrabee  of Jamie, in a manner not easily erased by a clarifying instruction.5 
 B. Strickland's Strong Presumption
 [*P48]  Such strategic grounds are easily enough to sustain the determination that counsel's performance survives the "highly deferential" review prescribed by Strickland. See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 689, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1984). Strickland established a "strong presumption that counsel's conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable professional assistance" guaranteed by the Constitution. Id. Recognizing the "distorting effect[] of hindsight," and warning that a "proliferation of ineffectiveness challenges" could "dampen the ardor and impair the independence of defense counsel," the Strickland court set a high bar for rebutting the presumption of the propriety of defense counsel's performance. Id. at 689-90. It noted, in particular, that "there are countless ways to provide effective assistance in any given case," and that "[e]ven the best criminal defense attorneys would not defend a particular client in the same way." Id. at 689. And of particular importance here, Strickland held that counsel's acts or omissions withstand scrutiny—falling squarely within the "strong presumption"—when there is reason to conclude that they "might be considered sound trial strategy." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).
 [*P49]  That is certainly the case here, as the notion of minimizing rather than highlighting problematic assertions at closing argument is widely endorsed as a technique of wise trial strategy6  and likewise upheld under Strickland  review.7 
 C. Incompatibility of the Majority's Analysis With Strickland
 [*P50]  The majority concedes that a decision not to "object can be both strategic and proper." Supra ¶ 27. But it declines to extend that principle to this case, citing the "difficult" nature of this case as a ground for drawing the Strickland "line in a different place." Supra ¶ 28.
 [*P51]  I see no room under Strickland for the line-drawing engaged in by the majority. Strickland draws a bright line—one affording the benefit of any doubt to defense counsel. See Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689. And in close cases like this one, the presumption in favor of trial counsel is dispositive; it requires rejection of a claim for ineffective assistance. Id.
 [*P52]  In declining to afford trial counsel the benefit of the doubt, the court asserts that accepting the "fear of highlighting" strategy will cripple Strickland challenges to prosecutorial misconduct, supra ¶ 30; it complains that endorsing that strategy will allow prosecutors to "engage in improper conduct without consequence," supra ¶ 31; and it notes that the decision facing trial counsel will often amount to a "Hobson's choice," supra ¶ 32. These concerns are both speculative and overstated, and the court's conclusions seem to me to be foreclosed by Strickland.
1
 [*P53]  The court's concerns about the impact of accepting the "fear of highlighting" strategy, supra ¶ 30, are overstated. Not all misstatements at trial could strategically be passed over on "highlighting" grounds. Some misrepresentations of the record would prove so misleading that no reasonable defense lawyer could deem the fear of highlighting to outweigh the prejudice it produces. And in such cases, the Strickland presumption would be overcome in the absence of any reasonable basis for concluding that counsel's omission "might be considered sound trial strategy." Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689.
 [*P54]  The court's concern for the supposed incentive for prosecutorial misconduct is also overstated. It cannot be said that the "highlighting" strategy will "almost always be available to the State" in cases where "defense counsel fails to object to improper comments." Supra ¶ 31. Nor is it accurate to say that such strategic basis would "permit the State to engage in improper conduct without consequence," thereby "insulat[ing] the State from objection to its misconduct". Id.
 [*P55]  Strickland applies on a case by case basis, not a categorical one. So the law would not always permit the State to defeat an ineffective assistance claim by trotting out a "fear of highlighting" argument. Strickland accounts for the complex realities of criminal trials, recognizing that the decision whether to object at closing argument involves  a careful weighing of both the concern for prejudice and the problem of highlighting. At some point the concern for prejudice predominates, and the only reasonable response is an objection. Then and only then does the failure to object sustain reversal under Strickland. Otherwise it is the province of defense counsel to strike the balance in favor of the decision to forgo an objection and avoid the problem of highlighting.
 [*P56]  The question of where to draw the line—of when to object and when to stand pat—is admittedly difficult. I suppose it could even be said that the question puts defense counsel to something of a "Hobson's choice," in which both "alternatives" may seem "equally objectionable." Supra ¶ 32. But that is hardly a basis for second-guessing and discrediting counsel's performance as constitutionally deficient. See supra ¶ 28 (recognizing that Larrabee's defense counsel faced a difficult decision in knowing whether to object, but nonetheless concluding that he acted ineffectively). Strickland dictates the opposite conclusion. It emphasizes the fact that there are "countless ways to provide effective assistance in any given case," and notes that "[e]ven the best criminal defense attorneys would not defend a particular client in the same way." 466 U.S. at 689. And it mandates affirmance—on a presumption of effectiveness—in circumstances where counsel's performance falls within the range of decisions that could be made on matters (such as a Hobson's choice) calling for a subjective judgment-call. Id. at 690.
 [*P57]  In any event, I see no reason to expect our application of Strickland to "permit[] the State to engage in improper conduct without consequence." Supra ¶ 32. The potential for a Strickland reversal is hardly the only disincentive for prosecutorial error. Prosecutors are officers of the court, whose duty it is to live up to a standard of professionalism and responsibility that extends beyond the short-sighted goal of success in a particular case. We should assume good faith in their performance of that duty. And even in cases where that duty is not enough, there are other downsides beyond Strickland reversal. Prosecutors must also be wary of potential repercussions at trial—from a judge who may call out a prosecutor for crossing a line (on objection or on the judge's own volition) or from a jury whose sense of propriety may likewise be inflamed.
 [*P58]  For me this is more than enough to refute the parade of horribles portrayed by the court. A faithful application of the "strong presumption" of Strickland can hardly be dismissed as a cataclysmic beginning of the end for prosecutorial ethics. Regardless of Strickland, prosecutors will retain plenty of incentives to refrain from misconduct.
2
 [*P59]  In any event, Strickland appears to me to foreclose the majority's analysis. As a subordinate court on matters of federal constitutional law, we are bound to follow Strickland—whether or not we find its downsides (in lowering barriers to prosecutorial misconduct, or in burdening ineffective assistance claims that we may deem meritorious) to outweigh its upsides (of avoiding a "proliferation of ineffectiveness challenges" that could "dampen the ardor and impair the independence of defense counsel," Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690.). The U.S. Supreme Court has already struck the policy balance as a matter of federal constitutional law. And we are not at liberty to strike it differently.
 [*P60]  In my view our court has effectively done so in carving out "fear of highlighting" considerations as subject to a heightened level of scrutiny. See supra ¶ 31 (suggesting that such considerations must be "analyzed with some skepticism"). Strickland countenances no hierarchy of strategies. It speaks categorically in prescribing a strong presumption in favor of the propriety of defense counsel's performance, with a safe harbor for any decision that "might be considered sound trial strategy." 466 U.S. at 689 (internal quotation marks omitted).
 [*P61]  That conclusion is reinforced by an extensive body of case law decided in Strickland's  wake.8  In such cases, federal and state courts alike (including this one) have consistently honored the strong presumption in favor of defense counsel's performance in cases where counsel's challenged act or omission could plausibly be considered sound trial strategy.9  They have done so, moreover, in cases involving misstatements by prosecutors.10 
 [*P62]   We should follow these cases—and the U.S. Supreme Court decision that spawned them. Faithfully applied, that authority requires affirmance. I respectfully dissent on that basis.
II. PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT AND PLAIN ERROR
 [*P63]  I would also reject Larrabee's alternative ground for reversal, which is rooted in a so-called doctrine of prosecutorial misconduct. In support of this argument, Larrabee invokes case law purportedly calling for reversal in the face of prosecutorial statements that "call to the attention of . . . jurors matters which they would not be justified in considering in determining their verdict," see State v. Ross, 2007 UT 89, ¶ 54, 174 P.3d 628—at least where jurors were "probably influenced by those remarks," id., and where the prosecutor's comments were "so obviously improper that the trial court had an opportunity to address the error," State v. Calliham, 2002 UT 86, ¶ 62, 55 P.3d 573.
 [*P64]  The standards invoked by Larrabee are problematic. His notion of a standalone doctrine of prosecutorial misconduct is a distortion of our adversary system, of our law of preservation, and of the constitutional and statutory restraints on our appellate power. And his proposed standard of review is an effective override of the settled plain error standard.
 [*P65]  I would accordingly reject the premises of Larrabee's argument. In so doing, however, I would recognize that our case law leaves some room for his proposed approach. I would acknowledge, in particular, that our cases have apparently characterized "prosecutorial misconduct" as a standalone basis for direct review of the actions of prosecutors. See e.g., Ross, 2007 UT 89, ¶ 54, 174 P.3d 628. And I would concede that we have also suggested that prosecutorial misconduct may somehow lower the showing required to demonstrate plain error. See Calliham, 2002 UT 86, ¶ 62, 55 P.3d 573.
 [*P66]  In noting these strands of our case law, however, I would definitively repudiate them. I would find them incompatible with the constitutional and statutory limits on our jurisdiction, and with longstanding tenets of the adversary system and of appellate review. We should repudiate the above-noted case law on those grounds. I would do so here, and I would reject Larrabee's alternative ground for reversal on that basis.
 A. Prosecutorial Misconduct and the Law of Preservation
 [*P67]  State v. Ross involved an appeal from a conviction for aggravated murder, in which the defendant claimed that the prosecutor had "committed prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument." 2007 UT 89, ¶ 3, 174 P.3d 628. In affirming (in part), we noted that the prosecutor's statements drew no objection, and purported to apply a plain error standard of review. Id. ¶ 53. Yet we did not proceed to analyze the question whether there was plain error in the failure to exclude the prosecutor's statements. Instead we "consider[ed] whether the State's remarks during closing arguments constitute[d] prosecutorial misconduct," set forth a two-part "test for prosecutorial misconduct," and analyzed the matter in terms of whether the prosecutor's remarks were harmless (not whether there was plain error in failing to exclude them sua sponte). Id. ¶¶ 53-58.
 [*P68]  Larrabee invokes Ross as a basis for a standalone doctrine of prosecutorial misconduct—for a doctrine of direct review of prosecutorial acts, independent of any review of lower court decisions. I would repudiate that reading of Ross, and thus reject it as an alternative ground for reversal.
  1
 [*P69]  Our power to decide cases on appeal is defined by article VIII section 3 of the Utah Constitution. Under that provision, we have the power to issue writs and to exercise "appellate jurisdiction over all other matters to be exercised as provided by statute." Utah Const., art. 8, § 3.11  Our jurisdictional statutes, in turn, confine our power to the review of "judgments," "orders," and "decrees" of the lower courts and agencies in our state system.12 
 [*P70]  These provisions are clear and unequivocal. They limit our authority to the review of lower court decisions. We have no power, under the jurisdictional statutes incorporated by reference in our constitution, to embark on a broader quest for justice.
2
 [*P71]  This framework is hardly unique to Utah. It is a reflection of an approach to appellate review that was embraced long ago in courts throughout the United States. That approach involved the adoption of a "writ of error" model of appellate review—and the corresponding rejection of the "appeal in equity" model. See Robert J. Martineau, Considering New Issues on Appeal: The General Rule and the Gorilla Rule, 40 Vand. L. Rev. 1023, 1026-28 (1987).
 [*P72]  Both models are found in our British common law roots. Historically, the "appeal in equity" provided for review "de novo"—a review in which "[t]he appellate court could review the entire case, both law and facts, and render any type of judgment it thought justice demanded, without regard to whether the issue upon which the appellate court based its judgment had been presented to the lower court." Id. at 1027. The writ of error model, by contrast, called only for a determination "whether the judge had made an error." Id. at 1026-27.
 [*P73]  "American appellate procedure followed the writ of error model rather than the appeal in equity" approach. Id. at 1027-28. Consequently, American appellate courts do not supervise trials and do "not . . . test whether the proper party ha[s] won." Id. at 1026. Rather, they review decisions made by lower courts for error. See Peatross v. Bd. of Comm'rs of Salt Lake Cnty., 555 P.2d 281, 284 (Utah 1976) ("Appellate jurisdiction is the authority to review the actions or judgment of an inferior tribunal upon the record made in that tribunal, and to affirm, modify or reverse such action or judgment.").13 
 [*P74]  Our constitution and governing jurisdictional statutes unequivocally embrace this model. We should accordingly reject those elements of our prior case law that appear to  endorse a wide-ranging authority to seek justice without regard to error.
 B. Plain Error Review
 [*P75]  Because we lack the authority to review the prosecutor's statements directly, we are left only to review the district court's judgment for error. And the only decision ripe for our review is the trial court's failure to intervene in the prosecutor's closing argument. I would review that decision under a plain error standard (since there was no objection), and I would find no difficulty affirming.
 [*P76]  "Plain error" is an exception to our preservation rules. It allows us to consider certain matters never raised for consideration by the lower court, but only in limited circumstances defined by our cases. See State v. Harris, 2012 UT 77, ¶ 24, 289 P.3d 591 (defining plain error as a "carefully circumscribed exception to the requirement of preservation" that "[w]e invoke . . . sparingly," and noting that an error can be plain only if it "should have been obvious to the trial court").
 [*P77]  Larrabee advocates an altered standard of plain error review. Citing Calliham, 2002 UT 86, ¶ 62, 55 P.3d 573, he asserts that his burden is not to demonstrate an "obvious" error in the district court's decision (not to exclude the prosecutor's statements sua sponte), but only to show that the prosecutor's statements were sufficiently obvious that "the trial court had an opportunity to address the error." Id. I would not read Calliham's dictum to override our longstanding standard of plain error. That standard is well-embedded in our case law, and entirely incompatible with the mere "opportunity" standard advanced by Larrabee. We should repudiate the Calliham dictum and reiterate that unpreserved objections to prosecutorial misstatements are reviewed under a standard plain error standard.
 [*P78]  Ours is an adversary system. For a variety of good reasons,14  our system leaves evidentiary objections in the hands of the parties. It recognizes that "the judge's gatekeeping responsibility is defined and shaped by the objections and motions made by counsel." Wilson v. IHC Hospitals, Inc., 2012 UT 43, ¶ 135, 289 P.3d 369 (Lee, J., dissenting).15  Thus, we do not generally expect the trial judge to interject himself into the process.16  We acknowledge that a judge is "not to undertake proactive, sua sponte efforts to keep inadmissible evidence from  affecting the jury," but only "to make appropriate rulings on objections or motions made by counsel in that regard." Id.17 
 [*P79]  Even on plain error review, the appellate role is informed by the writ-of-error model. Our review is not an ethereal search for justice, but a determination whether the lower court plainly erred in not resolving sua sponte a matter not preserved by the parties. See King, 2006 UT 3, ¶ 22, 131 P.3d 202 (explaining that the first element of "plain error" is a showing that the "trial court erred" by "acting beyond the limits of reasonability" (internal quotations marks omitted)).18 
 [*P80]  Sua sponte intervention is particularly problematic at the closing argument stage, when counsel is granted substantial leeway. Dibello, 780 P.2d at 1225. For all the reasons explained in part I above, defense counsel could reasonably have decided that the prosecutor's statements were better ignored than highlighted. And there is accordingly no basis for a determination of error on the part of the district court—much less error that is "plain."

 

