 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P75]  I concur in the judgment of the court and in most of the majority opinion. I applaud the court's refinement and clarification of the doctrine of chances. And I agree with its conclusion that no prejudice resulted from either of the errors alleged by Argueta—(a) the prosecutor's questions and comments about differences between Argueta's statements at the scene of the crime and his testimony at trial (allegedly in violation of Argueta's Fifth Amendment rights), and (b) the admission of Argueta's prior trespassing conviction (purportedly in contravention of our rules of evidence under the doctrine of chances).
 [*P76]  Normally I would agree that the lack of prejudice is a sufficient basis for disposition of this case. But the fact-intensive prejudice inquiry is not the reason we granted certiorari. We granted certiorari to consider whether the court of appeals erred in concluding that Argueta's Fifth Amendment rights were not violated when the prosecutor sought to impeach his credibility by highlighting "exculpatory details" that Argueta mentioned at trial but omitted in earlier statements to police. This is an important question. And we should address it because it has a straightforward answer in controlling precedent of the United States Supreme Court and in a governing decision of this court.23 
 [*P77]  The court of appeals based its conclusion on the United States Supreme Court's decision in Anderson v. Charles, 447 U.S. 404, 100 S. Ct. 2180, 65 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1980), which endorsed cross-examination that highlights inconsistencies between a defendant's trial testimony and prior voluntary statements to police. That case held that in such circumstances, there is no Fifth Amendment violation under Doyle v. Ohio, 426 U.S. 610, 96 S. Ct. 2240, 49 L. Ed. 2d 91 (1976) because the prosecution is not commenting on a defendant's silence (his failure to speak to police) but rather his statements to police. Charles, 447 U.S. at 408-09.
 [*P78]  Argueta has challenged that determination on certiorari. He claims that his Fifth Amendment rights were infringed under Doyle because the prosecutor's cross-examination drew "negative inferences" from his "silence," not his "inconsistent statements." Argueta thus views Charles as governing only the limited circumstance in which the defendant is cross-examined about statements that are irreconcilable. In Argueta's view, "Charles is inapplicable to this case because Argueta's [trial] testimony provided only additional details, not inconsistent statements, when comparing Argueta's trial testimony to his post-arrest statements to police."
 [*P79]  The State disagrees. It asserts that details given at trial but omitted in earlier statements to police are a kind of "inconsistency," and that any cross-examination focusing on such statements is fair game under Charles. It also contends that we already resolved this question in State v. Velarde, where we explained that Doyle has "no application to a case in which the defendant did not exercise his right to remain silent," and emphasized that there is no Fifth Amendment bar on "cross-examination that merely inquires into [voluntary] prior inconsistent statements." 675 P.2d 1194, 1196 (Utah 1984) (citations omitted). The State contends that this is precisely the situation here since Argueta did not exercise his right to remain silent but instead spoke freely and voluntarily to the police. Because the prosecutor did not use Argueta's "silence . . . to impeach an explanation subsequently offered at trial," Doyle, 426 U.S. at 618 (emphasis added), but rather highlighted differences between his prior voluntary statements and trial testimony (embellishments added at trial), the State asks us to affirm the court of appeals under the standards set forth in Doyle, Charles, and Velarde.
 [*P80]  I agree with the State's reading of these cases. In the paragraphs below, I show that these decisions hold that there is no constitutional bar on a prosecutor's comments highlighting inconsistencies between a story told voluntarily in a pretrial investigation and a story told voluntarily at trial. I then establish that there is no constitutional or logically tenable distinction between the inconsistency of (a) telling one story to police and a directly contradictory one at trial and (b) telling a limited story to police and embellishing it at trial. In neither circumstance has the defendant exercised his "right to remain silent." He has voluntarily spoken at two different stages of the process—in a police investigation and at trial. And in so doing he has voluntarily subjected himself to cross-examination, without any infringement of any right guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment or United States Supreme Court precedent. The circumstance at issue here (embellishment) is precisely the circumstance at issue in Velarde—the defendant's two voluntary stories were not directly contradictory, but inconsistent only in the sense that one added detail not previously provided. See infra ¶¶ 111, 111 n.26. In that situation, the Velarde court held that an "inconsistency" in a defendant's stories "is a legitimate basis for a prosecutor's testing the credibility of a witness by way of impeachment." 675 P.2d at 1195. And it affirmed a conviction against a constitutional claim that such a move ran afoul of the defendant's "right to remain silent." Id. (citation omitted).
 [*P81]  I find this holding controlling for reasons explained in greater detail below. The majority disagrees, asserting that Velarde does not "'clear[ly]' answer[] the question presented here." Supra ¶ 51. Yet it does so in an opinion that offers no salient basis for rejecting my reading of Velarde or for effectively distinguishing it—and that simultaneously purports to be avoiding the constitutional question altogether. See supra ¶ 49 (stating that the court is "declin[ing]" to decide the constitutional question); supra ¶¶ 55, 55 n.14 (asserting that a decision on "the constitutional question would go against our approach to judging" under the doctrine of "constitutional avoidance").
 [*P82]  The most the majority can say about Velarde is that it involved an "inconsistency" in which the defendant gave one version of his story prior to trial and a "different[]" version at trial. See supra ¶¶ 51-52. But that just underscores the parallelism between this case and Velarde. As in this case, the Velarde defendant's stories did not directly contradict each other—they were "inconsistent" only in the sense that the defendant embellished his story at trial. See infra ¶¶ 111, 111 n.26. It was in that context that the Velarde opinion held that "in order to assert the [Doyle] privilege[,] there must be an initial and sustained silence after the Miranda warning is given." Velarde, 675 P.2d at 1196 (emphasis added). That holding should control our decision here. We should not be waving it off on the ground that the opinion is somehow "unremarkable" and has been cited only once in our case law. See supra ¶ 54. That is not a basis for overriding a square holding of this court under our doctrine of stare decisis. And even if the facts of Velarde were "[un]ascertainable" because the opinion is less than two pages long, see supra ¶ 53, (they aren't, see infra ¶¶ 111, 111 n.26), this clear holding about the actions a defendant must take before invoking Doyle would still control. The court is thus in no position to claim that its decision to dismiss Velarde is an act of constitutional avoidance. See supra ¶ 55.
 [*P83]  Constitutional avoidance makes sense when we are resolving a case on a statutory or other alternate ground while declining to break new constitutional ground. If that's what the majority were doing, I could understand it as an act of judicial restraint. But that's not what's afoot. We have already broken the constitutional ground at issue—in our decision in Velarde. And the majority is openly casting shade on that decision. It is doing so, moreover, without identifying any persuasive ground for questioning the scope of this important decision.
 [*P84]  This is not an act of restraint or judicial "humility." See supra ¶ 55 n.14 (quoting State v. Rowan, 2017 UT 88, ¶ 27, 416 P.3d 566 (Himonas, J., concurring)). It is an open challenge to the settled state of our case law and our doctrine of stare decisis. In questioning Velarde—and the reading of that clear decision outlined further below—the court is not declining to decide an unresolved issue. It is reopening a heretofore resolved question, introducing doubt and ambiguity on a point that until today was clearly established. Unless and until the court explains (1) how the "inconsistency" in Velarde is any more contradictory than the "inconsistency" in this case and (2) how Argueta can invoke Doyle after "br[eaking] the silence guaranteed constitutionally," Velarde, 675 P.2d at 1196, it is in no position to claim to be engaged in an act of restraint or humility.
 [*P85]  There is no Fifth Amendment right to tell one story to the police and a different one at trial—at least, not one that allows you to insulate yourself from cross-examination. There is only a right not to be compelled to be a witness against yourself. And that right is in no way implicated in a case like this one where the defendant spoke voluntarily to police and again at trial.
 [*P86]  These conclusions follow clearly from three sets of controlling authorities: (1) longstanding United States Supreme Court precedent limiting the right against self-incrimination by allowing defendants to be cross-examined regarding voluntary statements made during direct examination, see Fitzpatrick v. United States, 178 U.S. 304, 315, 20 S. Ct. 944, 44 L. Ed. 1078, 1 Alaska Fed. 625 (1900), or police interrogation, see Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 469, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1966); (2) the Supreme Court's decisions in Doyle and Charles, which establish that there is no Fifth Amendment bar on "cross-examination that merely inquires into prior inconsistent statements" made voluntarily during a police investigation, Charles, 447 U.S. at 408; and (3) our opinion in Velarde, which holds that Charles extends to the kinds of inconsistencies at issue here—details provided at trial but not given during the initial police investigation, see 675 P.2d at 1195-96. I set forth the specific grounds for these conclusions in the three sections that follow.
I. Fitzpatrick and Miranda
 [*P87]  The Fifth Amendment establishes a right against compulsory self-incrimination. It says that "[n]o person shall be . . . compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself." U.S. CONST. amend. V. Defendants are thus protected against compelled testimony. And that leaves them open to cross-examination about voluntary statements given at trial on direct examination, or earlier in the course of pretrial police investigation.
 [*P88]  The first application of this principle is deeply embedded in controlling case law, going back at least as far as Fitzpatrick v. United States, 178 U.S. 304, 20 S. Ct. 944, 44 L. Ed. 1078, 1 Alaska Fed. 625 (1900). In Fitzpatrick, the Court held that an accused who "waives his constitutional privilege of silence" by "tak[ing] the stand in his own behalf" is subject to cross-examination. Id. at 315. So "[w]hile no inference of guilt can be drawn from [the defendant's] refusal to avail himself of the privilege of testifying," the defendant "has no right to set forth to the jury all the facts which tend in his favor without laying himself open to a cross-examination upon those facts." Id. Statements made on direct examination are made voluntarily. And they are thus fair game on cross-examination. In other words, a defendant is treated "with the same latitude as would be exercised in the case of an ordinary witness." Id.
 [*P89]  The same goes for statements made voluntarily to police during an investigation. This is a core premise of Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1966). That case established a warning that informs suspects of their right "to remain silent." Id. at 444 (emphasis added). But that warning also includes the famous "explanation" that "anything" they say "can and will be used against [them] in court." Id. at 469 (emphases added).
 [*P90]  These premises follow naturally from the core guarantee of the Fifth Amendment. The protected right is a right against compelled self-incrimination.24  That right is always subject to waiver, as when the defendant decides to speak voluntarily about his involvement in a crime. See Berghuis v. Thompkins, 560 U.S. 370, 384, 130 S. Ct. 2250, 176 L. Ed. 2d 1098 (2010) ("Where the prosecution shows that a Miranda warning was given and that it was understood by the accused, an accused's uncoerced statement establishes an implied waiver of the right to remain silent."). And once a suspect does that, he is in no position to complain about cross-examination highlighting differences between voluntary statements made at two different stages of interaction with the government.
 [*P91]  Argueta cannot and does not assert that his statements to the police were in any way compelled or involuntary. He gave them voluntarily after he received his Miranda warnings—warnings that included the caution that anything he said could and would be used against him in court. And the State made good on that promise. That is all that happened here. Argueta was cross-examined about voluntary statements he made to the police during his voluntary testimony at trial. And he is thus in no position to argue that this cross-examination infringed his Fifth Amendment rights.
II. Doyle and Charles
 [*P92]  Fitzpatrick and Miranda provide the context for and explain the Supreme Court's subsequent decisions in Doyle v. Ohio, 426 U.S. 610, 96 S. Ct. 2240, 49 L. Ed. 2d 91 (1976), and Anderson v. Charles, 447 U.S. 404, 100 S. Ct. 2180, 65 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1980). Contrary to Argueta's assertions, these decisions did not establish a right to give two different voluntary statements about a crime and then avoid cross-examination about the differences so long as the statements do not flatly contradict one another. They establish only a narrow limitation on the scope of permissible cross-examination. And they do so in a manner that confirms the propriety of the cross-examination challenged in this case.
 [*P93]  Doyle prohibits the prosecution from seeking to impeach a defendant by commenting on his "silence" during a police investigation. 426 U.S. at 617-19. But that holding is tethered to and based on the Miranda warning—and the notion that it is fundamentally unfair for the state to advise a suspect that he has the "right to remain silent" only to later highlight his silence as a basis for an inference of guilt at trial. Id. And Charles offers an important clarification of the Doyle principle by holding that there is no infringement of the Fifth Amendment where the cross-examination does not comment on "silence" but instead "inquires into prior inconsistent statements" made voluntarily to the police. 447 U.S. at 408.
 [*P94]  Taken together, Doyle and Charles sustain the decision of the court of appeals. They clarify that the prosecution is prohibited from commenting on a suspect's invocation of and reliance on the Miranda right to remain silent as a basis for an inference of guilt. But they reserve the prosecution's right to pursue cross-examination when the defendant has not exercised the right to remain silent but instead has spoken voluntarily to police and offered an explanation for his involvement in a crime.
A. Doyle
 [*P95]  The defendant in Doyle v. Ohio was arrested and convicted on charges of drug trafficking. 426 U.S. 610, 611, 96 S. Ct. 2240, 49 L. Ed. 2d 91 (1976). At the time of his arrest, he was advised of his Miranda right to remain silent. Id. at 612. And he exercised that right—he did not speak to the police. Afterward, the defendant took the witness stand and sought to undermine the government's portrayal of a drug deal in which the defendant had stood next to "a well-known 'street person' with a long criminal record," id. at 611, who held "a package under his arm, presumably after the transaction" had taken place, id. at 612. The defendant testified that in reality the "street person" had "framed" him—that the "street person" was the dealer, and that he (the defendant) had been seeking only to purchase drugs. Id. at 613.
 [*P96]  The prosecution sought to undermine the defendant's "framing" defense by questioning the defendant about his silence at the time of the initial police investigation. Id. at 613-14. It was in this context that the Doyle Court held that "impeachment use of a defendant's post-arrest silence," id. at 616, is an infringement of the defendant's constitutional rights—a "fundamentally unfair" move that amounts to "a deprivation of due process," id. at 618. Importantly, the Doyle Court did not root its decision in some freestanding notion of "fairness" or "due process." It specifically based its "fairness" inquiry on the content of the required Miranda warning. See id. at 617.
 [*P97]  The Doyle Court acknowledged that cross-examination regarding a defendant's voluntary "post-arrest statements" is entirely appropriate Id. (emphasis added). But it viewed commentary on a defendant's post-arrest silence as a different matter. The Court noted that Miranda "require[s] that a person taken into custody be advised immediately that he has the right to remain silent." Id. And it noted that a suspect's "[s]ilence in the wake of these warnings may be nothing more than the arrestee's exercise" of the Miranda right.25  Id. Although "the Miranda warnings contain no express assurance that silence will carry no penalty," the Court concluded that "such assurance is implicit to any person who receives the warnings." Id. at 618. And "[i]n such circumstances, it would be fundamentally unfair and a deprivation of due process to allow the arrested person's silence to be used to impeach an explanation subsequently offered at trial." Id. (footnote omitted).
 [*P98]  This clear holding of Doyle has no purchase in a case like this one. Here, there was no commentary on a defendant's invocation of silence, but only commentary about his voluntary statements. That is fair game under Doyle.
 [*P99]  Doyle is based on fundamental fairness concerns rooted in a defendant's reliance on the implied promises of the Miranda warnings. There are no such concerns in a case like this one. Argueta was given no "implicit" assurance that his voluntary statements to police would not be used against him. He was told the exact opposite. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 469, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 (establishing the warning that "anything" a suspect says "can and will be used against [him] in court"). So he was in no position to cry foul when his voluntary, post-Miranda statements were used for impeachment at trial.
B. Charles
 [*P100]  This reading of Doyle is confirmed by the Court's per curiam opinion in Anderson v. Charles, 447 U.S. 404, 100 S. Ct. 2180, 65 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1980). Charles reinforced the distinction between an impermissible inference from silence (in contravention of the Miranda warning) and permissible cross-examination and commentary on voluntary statements made to police. See id. at 408-409. And it openly rejected a "formalistic" understanding of "silence" that would blur the distinction between the two. Id. at 409.
 [*P101]  The defendant in Charles was arrested while driving a stolen car—a car that belonged to a man "who had been strangled to death in his Ann Arbor home less than a week earlier." Id. at 404. The defendant, found with personal property belonging to the deceased man, was given his Miranda warnings and asked about the stolen car. Id. at 404-05. He then voluntarily told the investigating officer "that he [had] stole[n] the car in Ann Arbor from the vicinity of Washtenaw and Hill Streets, about two miles from the local bus station." Id. at 405. But at trial, the defendant testified that he had taken the "unattended" car in question "from the parking lot of Kelly's Tire Co. in Ann Arbor." Id. On cross-examination, the prosecution challenged the trial testimony as a "recent fabrication" and asked the defendant why he hadn't told "anybody at the time [he was] arrested, where [he] got that car." Id. at 406. The prosecution also emphasized that the defendant had previously told an investigating police officer that he had stolen the car from "Washtenaw and Hill Street." Id.
 [*P102]  The defendant subsequently filed a federal habeas petition. Id. The Sixth Circuit held that "the prosecutor's questions about [the defendant's] post-arrest failure to tell officers the same story he told the jury violated due process under the rule of Doyle v. Ohio." Id. at 407 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). But the Supreme Court reversed, emphasizing many of the points that I have highlighted above.
 [*P103]  First, the Charles Court highlighted the limited nature of the Doyle holding. "Doyle bars the use against a criminal defendant of silence maintained after receipt of governmental assurances." Id. at 408 (emphasis added). It "does not apply to cross-examination that merely inquires into prior inconsistent statements." Id. "Such questioning makes no unfair use of silence because a defendant who voluntarily speaks after receiving Miranda warnings has not been induced to remain silent." Id. "As to the subject matter of his statements, the defendant has not remained silent at all." Id.
 [*P104]  Second, the Charles Court acknowledged that the line between silence and prior statements could be considered fuzzy. It noted that the Sixth Circuit had adopted a reading of Doyle that would bar questions that concerned a defendant's "failure to tell arresting officers the same story he told the jury." Id. (emphasis added) (citation omitted). And it conceded that there is a sense in which the failure to tell the same story told on a previous occasion "may be said to involve 'silence' insofar as it omits facts included in the other version." Id. at 409. But the Charles Court expressly repudiated this "formalistic understanding of 'silence.'" Id. In place of that view, the Court reinforced the Fifth Amendment principles at the heart of Miranda and Doyle, holding that Doyle is implicated only when the prosecution makes reference to a defendant's "exercise of his right to remain silent." Id. at 408 (citation omitted); see also id. at 409 (noting that a question that seeks only "to elicit an explanation for a prior inconsistent statement" is not a question that seeks to "draw meaning from silence," and is thus constitutional under Doyle).
 [*P105]  These principles again reinforce the court of appeals' analysis in this case. There may be a metaphysical sense in which questions about perceived differences between Argueta's voluntary statements on the night of his arrest and his trial testimony comment on "silence"—one story "omits facts included in the other version." Id. at 409. But this does not offend the Fifth Amendment under Charles. The "formalistic" sense in which the prosecution's cross-examination amounts to commentary on Argueta's "silence" is beside the point—the key question is whether the prosecution has asked the jury to infer guilt from a defendant's invocation of the right to remain silent set forth in the Miranda warning. Where (as here) that is not the case, there is no Doyle violation. There is only a fair commentary on differences between two voluntary stories told by the defendant. And this kind of commentary is the core of cross-examination and in no way violates the Fifth Amendment.
III. Velarde
 [*P106]  The above establishes the propriety of the prosecution's cross-examination and closing argument in this case under controlling precedent of the United States Supreme Court. But any arguable doubt on the matter is resolved by our decision in State v. Velarde, 675 P.2d 1194 (Utah 1984). Velarde is directly on point and directly controlling as a matter of stare decisis. The majority unsettles our law by suggesting otherwise.
 [*P107]  Velarde accepts the above understanding of the Charles opinion. It also goes further, resolving any remaining doubts of relevance to this case. Velarde holds that Doyle may be invoked only after "an initial and sustained silence" once Miranda warnings are given. Id. at 1196 (emphasis added). And it expressly holds that Charles permits cross-examination aimed at highlighting inconsistencies between two voluntary statements by the defendant—whether the inconsistencies are mere differences or outright contradictions.
 [*P108]  The police confronted the defendant in Velarde after pursuing a tip and finding him asleep in a truck in front of a Morgan, Utah café at 2:00 a.m. Id. at 1195. After the police officer confirmed that the truck was stolen, he arrested Velarde and gave him his Miranda warnings. Id. In response to the officer's questions, Velarde volunteered that he did not own the truck, that he had arrived at the café in the truck, and that he did not know he was in Morgan. Id. But he gave no other details. "At no time did defendant assert any right to remain silent." Id.
 [*P109]  Velarde later testified at trial. There, he gave additional details that he had not provided at the time of his arrest. He stated that another man had "picked him up [in the truck] in Salt Lake City," "driven past" the defendant's home, and "stayed on the freeway all the way to Morgan," where the other man lived. Id. The prosecution then sought to impeach the defendant on the basis of the differences between the story he told at trial and the voluntary statements he had made to the police officer. Id.
 [*P110]  On appeal, the defendant asserted that this cross-examination constituted commentary on his "silence" and therefore infringed his Fifth Amendment rights under Doyle. Id. We rejected that argument. We held that the "inconsistency of [the defendant's trial] testimony with what defendant had told the officer" was a "legitimate basis for a prosecutor's testing the credibility of a witness by way of impeachment." Id. And we emphasized that the defendant had "waived" his "Fifth Amendment guarantee to remain silent" by "talking freely with the officer" about the crime after receiving his Miranda warnings, and had done so again when he "took the witness stand." Id.
 [*P111]  That analysis is directly controlling here. Velarde makes clear that there is no Fifth Amendment bar on cross-examination or commentary that is aimed at highlighting differences between two stories told voluntarily by a defendant. And it emphasizes that the differences explored need not be limited to outright contradictions. Velarde speaks of "inconsistency." Id. But the inconsistency at issue there, as here, involved mere differences—additional details recounted at trial that were not given to police. In Velarde, after all, it was entirely possible for the defendant to have both (a) not owned the truck, arrived in Morgan in the truck, and not known he was in Morgan at the time of his arrest (as he told the police), and (b) been picked up in Salt Lake and driven to Morgan in the truck by another person (as he testified at trial).26  Yet we spoke of these differences as inconsistencies that opened the door to cross-examination. Id. And we emphasized that the defendant had waived his right to remain silent by speaking "freely with the officer."27  Id.
 [*P112]  The majority asserts that Velarde "tells us little to nothing about cases" where the alleged inconsistency involves details told at trial that were not relayed previously. Supra ¶ 54. But that is incorrect. This case is on all fours with Velarde. The inconsistency we encounter today is exactly the kind of inconsistency we encountered in Velarde. See supra ¶¶ 111, 111 n.26.
 [*P113]  The majority resists this conclusion. It says that Velarde could not have addressed whether "inconsistent" statements include differences as well as outright contradictions, see supra ¶ 53, because Velarde did not use the "key words" "'supplemental,' 'different,' or 'reconcilable,'"28  supra ¶ 54 n.12. I don't follow. The doctrine of stare decisis "requires," at a minimum, "that a decision rendered by a court in a particular factual context govern later decisions by that court arising under the same or similar facts." State v. Sims, 881 P.2d 840, 843 n.7 (Utah 1994). And that principle requires our application of the Velarde holding here—a decision giving "inconsistent" the content it must have had in order for the Velarde court to come to the decision it did. Both Argueta's and Velarde's statements were (1) voluntary and (2) ultimately reconcilable, supra ¶¶ 111, 111 n.26—and Velarde's were deemed "inconsistent." Velarde, 675 P.2d at 1196 (citation omitted). That should be the end of the matter. See Steiner Corp. v. Auditing Div. of Utah State Tax Comm'n, 1999 UT 53, ¶ 12, 979 P.2d 357 ("Stare decisis means that like facts will receive like treatment in a court of law." (citation omitted)).
 [*P114]  The majority also claims that we have not decided where embellishments like Argueta's "'fall' within the spectrum between Doyle and Charles." See supra ¶ 49. But I'm not sure how Velarde could have been any clearer. That opinion went to great lengths to distinguish the circumstance presented in a case like this one (and Charles and Velarde) from the situation in Doyle. It noted that "[t]he rationale which the Supreme Court [had] adopted for its decision in Doyle" was that it was "fundamentally unfair for the prosecution to impose a penalty at trial on a defendant who has exercised [his] right by choosing to remain silent." Velarde, 675 P.2d at 1195-96 (quoting United States v. Agee, 597 F.2d 350 (3d Cir. 1979)). It reasoned that "[t]he very statement of that rationale demonstrates that Doyle can have no application to a case in which the defendant did not exercise his right to remain silent." Id. at 1196 (quoting Agee, 597 F.2d 350). And it reinforced the straightforward reading of Charles that allows "cross-examination that merely inquires into prior inconsistent statements," given that "a defendant who voluntarily speaks after receiving Miranda warnings has not been induced to remain silent." Id. (quoting Charles, 447 U.S. at 408). Again, it deemed "inconsistency" to encompass not just outright contradictions but mere differences between a defendant's two voluntary accounts. Supra ¶¶ 111, 111 n.26. In these circumstances, Velarde makes clear that the prosecutor's inquiries "make[] no unfair use of silence." 675 P.2d at 1196 (quoting Charles, 447 U.S. at 408).
 [*P115]  These are precisely the circumstances of this case. And Velarde is accordingly controlling and entitled to respect as a matter of stare decisis. If the majority wishes to walk back Velarde it should do so transparently—and with something more than the truism that Velarde is less than two pages long and has been cited only once for the proposition that a defendant's "inconsistent testimony is legitimate basis for prosecutor's questioning his credibility." See supra ¶¶ 53-54 (citation omitted). I don't see how a case being short or cited only for its holding undermines its holding. If the court has doubts about Velarde, it should own that position and justify it under our doctrine of stare decisis. In the absence of such justification, Velarde is controlling.
 [*P116]  I would so hold. And I would affirm the court of appeals' analysis under Velarde's authority.

 

