 in part and concurring in the judgment:
 [*P31]  I concur in the judgment of the court in this case and in parts I and II.B of the majority opinion. I would not find trial counsel's performance deficient, however, and thus dissent from part II.A.
 [*P32]  The majority acknowledges (as does Hutchings) that "Jury Instruction 14 correctly set forth the statutory elements of aggravated assault." Supra¶20. Yet the court deems counsel's performance deficient because "Jury Instruction 27, which set forth general principles of intent," had the potential to "confuse[] the jury's understanding of Instruction 14." Supra¶20. The court's point, in other words, is not that the instructions as given were incorrect, but that there was a chance that the jury could misunderstand them—by construing the general intent instruction (number 27) to override the instruction specifically defining the intent required for aggravated assault (number 14).
 [*P33]  That possibility is not enough to sustain a finding of ineffective assistance under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1984). The standard for judging counsel's performance under Strickland is a "most deferential one."1  We defer to counsel's judgment because we recognize that "[u]nlike a later reviewing court, the attorney observed the relevant proceedings, knew of materials outside the  record, and interacted with the client, with opposing counsel, and with the judge."2 
 [*P34]  For me, this deferential standard sustains the conclusion that Hutchings's counsel performed well within the wide "'range of legitimate decisions regarding how best to represent a criminal defendant.'" State v. Lenkart, 2011 UT 27,¶25, 262 P.3d 1 (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689). One of the legitimate decisions trial counsel is continuously called on to make is whether and when to raise an objection with the court. In weighing whether to object or take exception to an instruction, the substance and propriety of the instruction is not the only strategic issue facing counsel, however. Even if counsel recognizes a potential for confusion in an instruction, he must assess not just whether an objection might be sustained, but whether the mere assertion of the objection might do more harm than good. Counsel could reasonably decide to hold off on a legally valid objection, for example, because the objectionable matter is ultimately immaterial and counsel is concerned about being viewed as the squeaky wheel.
 [*P35]  We are ill-positioned to second-guess trial counsel's evaluation of these considerations. Strickland is not a license to impose on trial counsel our hindsight-biased sense of best trial practices. If there is a reasonable basis for withholding an objection on strategic grounds, we should affirm the effectiveness of counsel's performance under Strickland. And in my view the record easily sustains such a conclusion here.
 [*P36]  The instructions under review seem straightforward and reasonably clear. Instruction 27 set forth general principles of intent, while Instruction 14 identified the specific elements (including intent) of aggravated assault. Nothing in the general definition in Instruction 27 is inaccurate or misleading. In fact, it simply, and quite correctly, identified two different objects of a defendant's intent—(a) a conscious objective or desire to engage in conduct and (b) a conscious objective or desire to cause a result. This instruction, in fact, is a verbatim quote from the criminal code's definition of intent.3 
 [*P37]  We can hardly fault trial counsel for not objecting to an instruction that accurately quoted the legal standard adopted by the legislature. Indeed, the appellate courts of this state have consistently regarded this very instruction as a proper "definition of specific intent"4 — even in cases (like this one) involving specific intent crimes.5  Hutchings's counsel undoubtedly had seen this same instruction numerous times before, and our statutes and case law gave him no reason to question it.
 [*P38]  Even assuming for the sake of argument that Instruction 27 by itself created some potential for confusion, that potential would have been resolved by Instruction 14. This instruction correctly clarified the specific application of the general instruction to the crime of aggravated assault, indicating that the crime requires proof of both kinds of intent identified in Instruction 27—of intent to commit the "assault" and to "[i]ntentionally cause[] serious bodily injury." In light of the specific instruction regarding aggravated  assault (number 14), I do not see how a jury could have "misunderstood the intent element of aggravated assault . . . finding intent to act rather than intent to cause the result sufficient to convict [defendant] of aggravated assault." Supra¶20 (emphases omitted). The only way the jury could reach that conclusion would be for it to completely disregard Instruction 14. And Instruction 27 did not at all open that door by simply identifying the two basic objects of a defendant's intent.
 [*P39]  Thus, the two instructions in question seem clear and straightforward. And they are compatible with each other and an accurate statement of the law. I would not fault counsel for failing to object to these instructions, particularly where he may have been saving his thunder for other more significant matters.
 [*P40]  The course of proceedings at trial seems to me to confirm this conclusion. As the majority indicates, there was no confusion at trial over the interaction between the aggravated assault intent instruction (number 14) and the general intent instruction (number 27). Supra¶26. "[T]here was no suggestion of any kind at trial that intent to act was sufficient to find that Hutchings had the intent to cause serious bodily injury," and "[t]he elements required to convict Hutchings of aggravated assault were correctly argued to the jury with the correct mental states throughout the trial proceedings." Supra¶26. That practical context does more than establish a lack of prejudice under Strickland; it also sustains the conclusion that any potential for confusion between the jury instructions in this case was purely theoretical, and thus that counsel would have been acting well within reason in deciding to hold the fire of his objections for other matters of real significance. I would affirm on this basis, and find that Hutchings' trial counsel acted reasonably under Strickland.
 [*P41]  The majority's contrary conclusion seems rooted in its sense of "best practices"—in our prior urging that "courts . . . take specific care to focus jury instruction language to apply narrowly to each applicable offense or element, rather than providing general statements which could be susceptible to misreading," and in the fact that "the second edition of the Model Utah Jury Instructions (MUJI) has now separated the two different types of intent to improve clarity and remove th[e] potential for confusion" between instructions like those given in this case. Supra¶24 n.9. I have no quarrel with the court's sense of best practices. And I applaud the recent MUJI amendment as an improvement in clarity.6  But I would not equate our sense of best practices with the deferential standard for effectiveness of counsel under Strickland.
 [*P42] Strickland is aimed at establishing a minimal bar of competence, not an aspirational standard of best practices. Hutchings' trial counsel easily satisfied the standard of minimal competence under Strickland, and I would affirm on that basis.

 

