
 [*P64]  I agree with the majority's determination that "the court of appeals erred in overruling the trial court sua sponte on an issue that was neither preserved in the trial court nor argued on appeal." Supra ¶ 63. And I applaud the majority for limiting and repudiating elements of the standard set forth in State v. Robison, 2006 UT 65, 147 P.3d 448, see supra ¶¶ 25-28, and for helpfully delineating the "writ of error" roots of our adversary system of appellate procedure, see supra ¶¶ 8-12. I write separately, however, because I think the court goes too far in endorsing an "appeal in equity" alternative to our adversary system on appeal. See supra ¶¶ 9-11. I find no basis, in particular, for the majority's endorsement of appellate discretion to consider a claim of error that was neither preserved at trial nor briefed on appeal. See supra ¶ 12. That discretion, as framed by the court and as presented in this case, is far too sweeping.
 [*P65]  The "issue" addressed by the court of appeals in this case concerned the correctness of the "homicide by assault" instruction given to the jury. That was a distinct "claim of error" that was neither preserved in the district court nor raised by the appellant on appeal. And I see no basis for an appellate court to introduce that kind of "issue" sua sponte. I would so conclude, while providing  a more fulsome repudiation of the standard in Robison as applied to issues (distinct claims of error) like the one presented here.
 [*P66]  In the paragraphs below, I first articulate the basis on which I would decide this case—in a simple statement that appellate courts have no discretion to raise distinct claims of error that were neither preserved below nor presented on appeal. Then I outline concerns I have with the court's contrary approach, highlighting the lack of any support in the authority cited in the majority opinion for the sweeping notion of appellate discretion to introduce claims of error not raised at any point by the parties.
I
 [*P67]  Our adversary system of justice relies on the parties to identify the "claims" presented for judicial decision. At the trial court level, we treat the plaintiff as the "master of the complaint."1  That means that the plaintiff has the prerogative of identifying the claims or causes of action she seeks to sustain in court. And we honor the plaintiff's prerogative. Our courts are empowered to adjudicate only the claims or causes of action alleged by the plaintiff. In our adversary system our courts do not direct plaintiffs to advance claims they have not pled.
 [*P68]  We would never tell a plaintiff who pleaded only a negligence claim that we think she should have framed her case in strict liability terms—and direct the parties to litigate that claim. See Combe v. Warren's Family Drive-Inns, Inc., 680 P.2d 733, 736 (Utah 1984) ("A court may not grant judgment for relief" that is not "within the theory on which the case was tried," regardless of whether the evidence implies such relief). If a district court strays from "the issues [as] framed by the pleadings," "[a]ny findings . . . are a nullity." Id.
 [*P69]  Indeed our law of claim preclusion dictates the opposite. It gives a party who defends against one claim arising out of a particular set of facts the right not to face an alternative claim that could have been but was not asserted earlier. See Gillmor v. Family Link, LLC, 2012 UT 38,  ¶¶ 10, 13-14, 284 P.3d 622 (stating the elements of the law of claim preclusion). And we root that right in principles of finality and repose. Allen v. Moyer, 2011 UT 44, ¶ 7, 259 P.3d 1049 ("[C]laim preclusion . . . promote[s] finality and protect[s] litigants by ensuring that parties will have to litigate a controversy only once."), overruled on other grounds by Madison v. JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., 2012 UT 51, ¶ 5 n.2, 296 P.3d 671.
 [*P70]  Our appellate process is similar. On appeal it is the appellant who is the "master"—the party who identifies "claims" to be disposed of by the court. In appellate parlance we speak of "claims of error"—decisions made by a lower court requiring reversal of the court's judgment. See State v. Kell, 2002 UT 106, ¶ 10, 61 P.3d 1019 (referring to "claims of error" alleged by the appellant on appeal). Our appellate rules require the appellant to identify specific decisions—orders or judgments—that are challenged on appeal. See Utah R. App. P. 3(d) (requiring notice of appeal to designate the "judgment or order, or part thereof, appealed from"). And our case law has long held that "[a]n order not identified in the notice of appeal falls beyond our appellate jurisdiction." In re Adoption of B.B., 2017 UT 59, ¶ 106,     P.3d    ; see also Jensen v. Intermountain Power Agency, 1999 UT 10, ¶¶ 6-9, 977 P.2d 474 (notice of appeal must identify orders for review; orders not identified are beyond the jurisdiction of the court to review).
 [*P71]  A parallel principle applies to the appellant's briefing. Under our briefing rules the appellant's opening brief must identify any and all judgments or orders that are challenged on appeal. See Utah R. App. P. 24(c). The failure to raise such a challenge in the brief amounts to forfeiture. See Brown v. Glover, 2000 UT 89, ¶ 23, 16 P.3d 540 (claims of error "not presented in the opening brief  are considered waived"). That principle is deeply embedded in our case law. We routinely decline to consider claims of error raised for the first time in a reply brief or at oral argument. See, e.g., Kendall v. Olsen, 2017 UT 38, ¶¶ 11-13,     P.3d    ; Mackin v. State, 2016 UT 47, ¶ 20 n.2, 387 P.3d 986.
 [*P72]  These rules define the scope of the claims presented for the court's consideration on appeal. For good reasons: (a) the appellee "is entitled to know specifically which judgment[s]" or orders are "being appealed," Jensen, 1999 UT 10, ¶¶ 6-9, 977 P.2d 474 (citation omitted); (b) the appellee has a right of "repose" or reliance on the finality of decisions not challenged on appeal;2  (c) our judges are supposed to be neutral arbiters, affording procedural fairness and evenhanded judgment to the parties, not partisan advocacy;3  and (d) considerations of efficiency and judicial economy are undermined by sua sponte injection of new claims by the court.4 
 [*P73]  For the above reasons we would not have allowed Mr. Johnson to raise a challenge to the "homicide by assault" jury instruction if he had sought to raise it on appeal for the first time at oral argument (as the court of appeals did). At that point, the time for Mr. Johnson to assert a claim of error in connection with this jury instruction was long past. Principles of finality and repose would thus have dictated a decision not to reach this question on appeal.
 [*P74]  It is no answer to say that it was the court of appeals (and not Mr. Johnson) who introduced this claim of error. If an advocate for a party is barred from asserting a claim, then the court is a fortiori barred. Ours is an adversary system. Within it judges are sworn to follow the law in an evenhanded, objective manner. We sidestep that system when we take on a role of advocacy. See United States v. Pryce, 938 F.2d 1343, 1352, 291 U.S. App. D.C. 84 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (Silberman J., dissenting) ("[T]he judiciary is on no side. That proposition is not a technicality; it is fundamental. We judges must be strictly neutral with respect to all cases that come before us . . . .") (emphasis in original).
 [*P75]  And in my view the decision to advance a claim for relief—either a cause of action in the district court or a claim of error on appeal—is the distinct prerogative of a party. We cross a line we should not cross when we seize the role of identifying claims we wish the parties had advanced. We cannot assert that role while maintaining a role of neutral arbiter.
 [*P76]  I would so hold. I would repudiate the standard set forth in Robison to the extent it could be read (and was read by the court of appeals) to endorse the power of an appellate court to introduce claims of error not raised by an appellant.
 [*P77]  In so doing I would leave room for the notion of an appellate prerogative of seeking supplemental briefing on issues or arguments of relevance to the disposition of a claim that is properly before the court. See supra ¶ 14 n.2 (indicating that "new arguments, when brought under a properly preserved issue or theory, do not require an exception to preservation"). That, as the majority indicates, is a long-settled practice. In keeping with our role in the adversary system, we must also acknowledge our duty to pronounce correct principles of law. And to fulfill that duty we may occasionally request additional argument or analysis on issues necessarily implicated by the claims that are presented for our decision.
 [*P78]  But that is a different matter than the one presented here. No claim presented for  decision requires us to assess the correctness of the "homicide by assault" instruction. And for that reason I see no basis for the majority's decision to expound at length on the standards governing our decision to request supplemental briefing on issues necessarily implicated by the claims briefed for our decision. I would save that for another day. I would simply hold that the court of appeals erred in sua sponte raising a claim of error that was neither preserved nor presented by the defendant on appeal.
II
 [*P79]  The majority echoes many of the principles discussed above. It reinforces the "dominance" of the adversary system and concludes that our appellate system "more closely resembl[es] the writ-of-error model" of review. Supra ¶¶ 9-10. And it repudiates some of the premises of the Robison standard for sua sponte consideration of "issues" not preserved or raised by the parties.
 [*P80]  To that extent I agree with the majority. Yet the court also presents an alternative "model" of appellate review—the "appeal in equity" approach, which was embraced historically by certain courts of equity. Supra ¶ 9. The majority says that "'[a]ppellate courts in equity were free to consider any issue de novo' and 'developed flexible procedures to address the needs of individual cases.'" Supra ¶ 9 (quoting Barry A. Miller, Sua Sponte Appellate Rulings: When Courts Deprive Litigants of an Opportunity to Be Heard, 39 SAN DIEGO L. REV. 1253, 1263 (2002)). And it cites cases and commentary in support of the proposition that our appellate system incorporates components of both models. The upshot, in the majority's view, is that American appellate courts "wrestle[] with the correct balance between law and equity and the scope of review on appeal" and retain extensive discretion to raise new "issues" not preserved or argued by the parties. See supra ¶ 11.
 [*P81]  I think the majority understates the degree to which our American appellate system has embraced the adversarial ("writ of error") model. And it overstates the matter quite dramatically to suggest that we retain the discretion of a court exercising power over an "appeal in equity." Our appellate system looks nothing like the "appeal in equity" model described by the majority. We have never left our appellate courts "free to consider any issue de novo" regardless of whether it was preserved or raised by the parties. Certainly we have not endorsed the majority's implicit premise that appellate courts retain the authority to identify claims of error not raised by an appellant—to root around in the record in search of a decision made by the trial court that offends our sense of fairness, and thus our confidence in the "equity" of the proceeding below.
 [*P82]  The majority presents purportedly contrary authority. But much of the cited authority is taken out of context.5  Some of the cited cases address only the court's authority to embrace exceptions to the law of preservation, see State v. Holgate, 2000 UT 74, ¶ 13, 10 P.3d 346, or the court's power to consider alternative evidentiary inferences not expressly advanced by the parties, see Salt Lake City v. Carrera, 2015 UT 73, ¶ 17, 358 P.3d 1067. Other cited cases establish only the modest authority to seek additional argument or analysis deemed necessary to the disposition of claims properly raised by the parties.6  We may well have that authority.  But that is not the question presented here.7  Here we are confronted with the question of an appellate court's authority to identify a brand new claim of error—a jury instruction never objected to, not raised on appeal by the defendant, and not necessary to the disposition of claims properly before the court.
 [*P83]  I find very little precedent for that kind of sweeping power. I do not doubt that American courts have occasionally taken upon themselves that sort of discretion. But it strikes me as problematic for them to do so—for all of the reasons noted above. See supra ¶¶ 67-78. And I would not endorse that prerogative here.
 [*P84]  I would hold that the decision of which claims of error to advance on appeal is a matter for the appellant. And I would expressly foreclose our appellate courts from identifying new claims of error sua sponte.

 

