
 [*P23]  I can appreciate the court's misgivings regarding the verdict in this case, given that trial counsel failed to address the victim's equivocation about the crucial issue of his age at the time of the events in question. As the State properly concedes, defense counsel should have consulted with his client about that issue, and his failure to do so amounts to deficient performance under step one of the ineffective assistance of counsel standard set forth in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984).
 [*P24]  That concession, however, does not in my view sustain the court's decision to remand for a new trial on the harmful materials charge (which is the only charge before us on certiorari). I respectfully dissent because I find no basis in the record to sustain the court's conclusion that the defendant established the second prong of his Strickland claim—a reasonable probability that the trial would have turned out differently if counsel had performed reasonably.
 [*P25]  First, Moore has not established that his lawyer's failure to consult with him on the timing issue would have altered his trial strategy. As the majority indicates, the defense Moore presented at trial was alibi-like. Supra ¶ 15. It sought to undermine the victim's description of the crimes through the testimony of Moore's sisters, who testified that in 2002 they were consistently in the home caring for their dying mother and never saw Moore or any other young boys come into the house, and also that at that time there was no TV in the bedroom where the sexual assault was allegedly committed. This defense allowed Moore to advance his position that the acts in question never took place, and to do so without ever taking the witness stand.
 [*P26]  If trial counsel had discussed with Moore the discrepancy in the victim's statements on timing, they would have faced a dilemma. On one hand, the discrepancy might have opened the door for trial counsel to argue that the events in question may have happened—if at all—in 2003, after the victim had turned fourteen and when Moore thus could not be found guilty of aggravated child sex abuse (but only of dealing in harmful materials). And if they had chosen that approach, they might have decreased the odds of a conviction on the aggravated child sex abuse charge. Yet that approach would not have been inevitably preferable to the one counsel ultimately chose. After all, by 2003 Moore's mother had passed away and his sisters were no longer living in the home, so they could not have offered any "alibi" on his behalf. Hence the dilemma: If defense counsel had focused on the victim's earlier statement that the events in question took place in 2003, he would have undermined his "alibi" defense, as his "alibi" witnesses were not in the home in 2003 and could not have testified on his behalf.
 [*P27]  Thus, a decision to highlight the 2003 date previously identified by the victim could have opened the door for Moore to challenge one of the counts against him, but it also could have closed the door to his "alibi" defense to the whole encounter. Moreover, if counsel had highlighted the 2003 date, that likely would have provoked the prosecution to move to amend the information and jury instructions "to include 2003 as a possible  year when the offense took place." Supra ¶ 13.1  This amendment surely would have left the 2002 charge in place as to both the aggravated child sex abuse charge and the harmful materials charge, while simply adding an alternative charge for 2003 that included only a harmful materials charge.2 
 [*P28]  And if we assume (as we must) reasonableness on the part of the prosecution, we should also conclude that a reasonable motion to amend would have been granted by the district court. Rule 4 certainly does not suggest otherwise. It leaves ample discretion for the district court to determine whether and to what extent an amendment would prejudice the "substantial rights of the defendant,"3  and to remedy such prejudice with a continuance if it appears that the defendant would need additional time to prepare a defense to the amended charge.4  If Moore had questioned the victim's credibility by noting his equivocation over whether the conduct took place in 2002 or 2003, that likely would have provoked the prosecution to move to amend the information to include a harmful materials charge as to 2003. And in that event, it seems highly likely that the prosecution's motion would have been granted pending, perhaps, a continuance to allow the defense to prepare to defend against that charge.
 [*P29]  In defending the contrary view, the majority insists that Strickland "do[es] not require [Moore] to show us what his defense would have been if the State had amended its information" or "to prove that the defense was viable." Supra ¶ 18. I cannot see how that can be true, unless we are eliminating the defendant's longstanding burden under Strickland of establishing not just deficient performance of counsel but also prejudice to the outcome at trial.5  Granted, the defendant's burden does not rise to the level of establishing "'that counsel's deficient conduct more likely than not altered the outcome in the case.'" Supra ¶ 17 (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 693) (emphasis added). But that does not mean that there is no burden at all. The defendant's burden of establishing prejudice under Strickland is well-ingrained in U.S. Supreme Court precedent and in the parallel precedent  of this court,6  and it is a heavy burden.7  "[M]ini-trial[s] on appeal" and difficulties evaluating "less clearly defined" defenses are the natural result of that burden, not a justification for releasing defendants from it.8  See supra ¶ 18. And unless we are somehow jettisoning that burden today, we can hardly award Moore a new trial without some proof from him as to how his case would probably have proceeded but for trial counsel's deficient performance. The absence of such proof from Moore is yet another ground for rejecting his ineffective assistance claim under Strickland.
 [*P30]  It is no answer to insist that "[i]t is impossible for us to know" or that "it is unclear what would have happened if trial counsel had pressed the discrepancy in L.B.'s interviews" or "how the jury would have viewed this information" or "how [Moore] might have defended against any modifications the State might have made." See supra ¶¶ 18, 21. If "we can only speculate as to what would have happened next" as the court suggests, supra ¶ 19, that is due to Moore's failure to carry his burden on these matters. True, there were "many paths" Moore could have chosen, "some of which may have resulted in conviction, and some of which may have resulted in acquittal." Supra ¶ 19. But he failed to prove, with a reasonable probability, that he would have chosen the path to acquittal. And such failure is hardly a basis for "declin[ing] to uphold [Moore's] conviction." See supra ¶ 21. It is Moore who carries the burden of establishing prejudice under Strickland, and the matters of "speculation" cited by the court are essential elements of a showing of prejudice. Moore's failure to carry that burden must cut the other way, and cannot possibly sustain that court's conclusion that he "has shown that there is a reasonable probability that the result of the proceeding would have been different" absent counsel's deficiency. See supra ¶ 21.
 [*P31]  Ultimately, Moore's counsel's decision to ignore the timing discrepancy in the victim's description of the events in question was a "shoot the moon" strategy—one that pressed for a complete victory in the form of an acquittal on all counts (under the "alibi" defense) while sacrificing a chance for a partial victory in the form of a child sex abuse acquittal with a harmful materials conviction. We may question that strategy in hindsight, particularly given that it failed. But our cases routinely endorse such strategies as within the broad range of reasonable decisions counsel may make under Strickland.9  We should likewise decline to second-guess  counsel's judgment here or lightly assume that a change in trial strategy would have changed the outcome of the trial.10 
 [*P32]  Moore's counsel reasonably decided not to open the door to 2003 in order to ensure that the jury had no compromise option before it. If Moore's counsel had highlighted the time discrepancy in the victim's prior statements, the compromise option could have been placed on the table by a prosecution motion to amend or vary the charges against Moore. Since that move would have been risky, I see no reason to assume that Moore's trial strategy would have changed or that the outcome of trial would have been different if his counsel had discussed with him the time discrepancy in the victim's prior statements. And for that reason I would reject Moore's Strickland argument and affirm his conviction on the harmful materials charge.

 

