
 [*P35]  I agree with the court's conclusion that Aaron Harrison's physical assault on J.M.S. was not an abortion "procedure" under Utah Code section 76-7-301(1), but write separately to articulate grounds for that construction that differ somewhat from those embraced by the majority. For me, the salient basis for interpreting "procedure" to encompass medical methods and to exclude a physical assault is in the structural interplay between the abortion statute, Utah Code Ann. § 76-7-314(1)(b)(i) (Supp. 2009), and the homicide statute, id. § 76-5-201(1)(a) (2008). As the court explains in Part I.B of its opinion, the coexistence of those two statutes clearly indicates that medical abortions are the domain of the abortion statute while nonmedical means of causing death (like an assault) are covered by the homicide statute. Supra ¶¶ 24-25. The contrary view advanced by J.M.S. (that all methods of killing an unborn child count as an "abortion") cannot be accepted without "render[ing] meaningless the legislature's designation of the intentional killing of an unborn child as a criminal homicide." Supra ¶ 25.
 [*P36]  On that point I am in full agreement with the majority and concur in Part I.B of the court's opinion. I find the rest of the court's analysis unnecessary and ultimately unpersuasive, however, and write separately to explain why.
 [*P37]  The court's opinion includes two other points in addition to the structural analysis in Part I.B: (a) that the legislature "intended [no] differences among its usage of 'procedures,' 'abortion procedures,' and 'medical procedures'" as those terms are used in the abortion statute, supra ¶ 19 (Part I.A); and (b) that it would be "absurd" to construe "procedures" to "includ[e] any series of actions or steps, whether humane or heinous, intended to kill a fetus," supra ¶ 31 (Part I.C). I do not see either of these points as independent grounds for our holding today.
 [*P38]  First, without the inference from the structural interplay between the two different statutes criminalizing the killing of unborn children, there would be no persuasive ground for reading the term "procedure" to mean "medical procedure." I agree with the majority that "[w]hat one means by using the term 'procedure' depends heavily on context." Supra ¶ 14. But the context cited by the court in part I.A strikes me as insufficient. As the court acknowledges, the abortion statute's definition employs the term "procedure" without modification or limitation. Supra ¶ 10. Without more, the use of the unmodified term "procedure" in the abortion statute suggests that the legislature eschewed the excluded modifier that appears extensively elsewhere in the act. Our cases often treat such internal differences in terminology as intentional.1  Thus, the face of the abortion statute itself seems only to undermine the view that "the legislature intended [no] differences among its usage of 'procedures,' 'abortion procedures,' and 'medical procedures.'" Supra ¶ 19.
 [*P39]  It may well be true (and is for reasons explained in part I.B in the majority opinion) that the legislature used "'procedures,' 'medical procedures,' and 'abortion procedures' interchangeably throughout its provisions" with "no intended difference among any of the usages." Supra ¶ 19. But that conclusion is not evident in the ink on the paper of the abortion statute. Without looking beyond that statute, it would be impossible to tell whether "the modifier 'medical'" was "surplusage," as the majority concludes, supra ¶ 19, or intended, as is linguistically possible for reasons described above.
 [*P40]  There are means at our disposal to answer the question that the majority raises in Part I.A—whether the "ordinary and accepted meaning of the term 'procedure,' "supra ¶ 21, is limited to medical methods. I have employed such means (corpus linguistics  data) before, explaining that an empirical measure of ordinary usage may be appropriate to check our less-than-perfect judicial intuition.2  In this case, the majority's confident assertion about the "ordinary and accepted meaning" of the term "procedure" in an abortion setting ultimately is based on its intuition—that although "procedure" sometimes signifies any means of accomplishing a result, an "abortion procedure" has reference to a medical procedure. I do not doubt that intuition. (In fact, empirical corpus analysis confirms it.3  ) My quarrel is just that this conclusion follows from our understanding of the word "procedure" in the context of the term "abortion," not from the fact that the statute most often refers to "medical procedures" and not just "procedures."
 [*P41]  Second, I disagree with the court's conclusion that our holding follows from our canonical inclination to "refrain[] from blind obedience to the letter of the law that leads to patently absurd ends." Supra ¶ 27. This strikes me as an incorrect application of a misplaced canon. The absurdity canon is properly invoked where we conclude that a certain construction is so absurd that we are certain that "the legislative body which authored the legislation could not have intended it." State ex rel. Z.C., 2007 UT 54, ¶ 13, 165 P.3d 1206. "But the question in such cases is whether the practical implications of the plain text (not a text with two [plausible] interpretations) are so absurd and ridiculous that we are convinced that the legislature could not have meant what it said." Marion Energy, Inc. v. KFJ Ranch P'ship, 2011 UT 50, ¶ 69, 267 P.3d 863 (Lee, J., dissenting). This is not such a case. The statute does not plainly extend to nonmedical abortion procedures, and the question accordingly is not whether to ignore such language on the ground that the legislature "could not have intended it."
 [*P42]  We are faced instead with a term ("procedure") of ambiguous meaning that we must interpret in light of its context. That context undoubtedly includes the practical implications of our construction, including, of course, any absurdities. I therefore agree with the majority to the extent it is simply suggesting that practical realities should inform our construction of the abortion statute. But the relevant practical realities are not just ones that are so clearly absurd that they would convince us to override statutory plain language.4  The relevant question in this case is a broader one—whether the practical implications of one interpretation of "procedure" are sufficiently problematic to undermine a judicial decision attributing that construction to the legislature.
 [*P43]  Finally, it seems to me that without the inference from the interplay between the homicide statute and the abortion statute, it  would not at all "be absurd to construe the 'abortion' definition as including any series of actions or steps, whether humane or heinous, intended to kill a fetus." Supra ¶ 31. I certainly agree that the legislature must have meant to impose criminal penalties in the "barbaric scenarios designed to kill an unborn child" imagined by the majority. Supra ¶ 29. But the absurdity identified by the majority is rooted not in the abortion statute's definition itself but again in the interplay between the two statutes at issue. Of course the legislature did not mean to "condone the beating of a woman to cause a miscarriage or a sniper's shot intended to kill a fetus but merely wound its mother." Supra ¶ 31. But the question before us is not whether such acts are criminal, but whether they fit under the homicide statute or the abortion statute.
 [*P44]  For me, the answer to that question is simply and thoroughly established by the structural argument set forth in Part I.B of the court's opinion. I find the discussion in Parts I.A and I.C either unconvincing or entirely dependent on the structural analysis in Part I.B, and I respectfully join only the latter.

 

