
 [*P121]  The Utah Adoption Act requires a mother who wishes to oppose the adoption of her biological child to file a motion to intervene in the adoption proceedings. See Utah Code § 78B-6-110(6). By statute, the mother must "strictly comply" with this requirement. Id. § 78B-6-110(6)(b). Failure to do so within thirty days of being served with notice of the proceedings results in a "forfeit[ure]" of the mother's parental rights. Id. § 78B-6-110(6)(b)(ii).
 [*P122]  This is a rule of preservation—a law prescribing the form or timing of an objection necessary for a litigant to proceed with the assertion of her legal rights. Such rules abound in our law. And the long-established consequence of the failure to follow such rules is a procedural default, with a resulting loss of the underlying right.
 [*P123]  The majority opposes this effect of the Adoption Act. It overrides the plain text of the statute, excuses the mother from her procedural default, and adopts a new rule of preservation of its own making—a rule that allows a mother to avoid forfeiture of her rights if she files a document that "fulfill[s] the purpose[]" of a motion to intervene.201 Supra ¶ 47.
 [*P124]  I respectfully dissent from this decision. The court claims to find support for it in a body of substantive due process case law. But the court's holding does not follow from that case law. It is a bold, policy-driven override of a law enacted by the legislature. I dissent because I find no basis for today's decision in the due process principles cited by the majority and foresee significant mischief caused by it.
 [*P125]  The mother in this case failed to follow the statutory filing requirement. She did so not because of any difficulty in following the requirement, but because she got bad advice from her lawyer. The requirement, moreover, is admittedly fair and entirely constitutional as a matter of procedural due process. The majority agrees. See supra ¶ 29 (citing In re Adoption of J.S., 2014 UT 51, ¶ 23, 358 P.3d 1009 for the proposition that "when the failure to comply with a 'simple and straightforward' procedural requirement is due to legal counsel's mistake, the procedural requirement has not foreclosed meaningful access to the justice system").202  Yet the court proceeds to establish a new constitutional right of due process that excuses the mother's procedural default. It holds that "mothers retain a fundamental right in their children regardless of a failure to comply with any state-prescribed procedure."203 Supra ¶ 37.
 [*P126]  The majority seeks to portray its decision as a matter that follows from settled precedent. But that is incorrect. No court, to my knowledge, has ever established a constitutional right of a litigant (even one seeking to protect a fundamental right) to flout a legal filing requirement but avoid the normal consequence of such a move (procedural default). Certainly the majority has not cited such a case. And with that in mind, the court should take ownership of the novelty of its decision. It is the court's prerogative to establish new rights in the name of the constitution—the principle of substantive due process opens the door to such decisions. But in so doing the court cannot properly be viewed as merely endorsing a mechanical application of existing precedent. That is not what is going on here. The court is certainly citing a line of precedent. But its decision involves a significant extension of the cited cases. And the extension will sow the seeds of confusion in our law for years to come.
 [*P127]  The court cites a string of cases (several from the United States Supreme Court and a few from this court) in which a parent's fundamental right is framed on the basis of "(1) the status of the individual invoking the right and (2) the parental conduct to be protected." Supra ¶ 59. Because the cited cases have "looked to the status of the individual and the conduct to be protected before determining whether the individual's claim fell within the umbrella of parental rights" (which are admittedly fundamental), the court objects to my more specific framing of the inquiry into the asserted "right" in question. Supra ¶ 60. On that basis the majority seeks to turn my criticism of the novelty of its approach against me. It asserts that I am the one who is pressing a novel framing of the inquiry into fundamental parental rights. The court's argument proceeds in two steps. First, the court complains that its cited cases ask only "whether parental conduct falls within the umbrella of protected parental rights," not "whether parents have a recognized right to be free of . . . a judicially imposed forfeiture of all parental rights." Supra ¶ 63. And because a mother's parental rights need not be "perfected" in the manner required of unwed fathers, the majority next insists that the mother's fundamental right "is not contingent upon compliance with any procedural requirement that the state may establish." Supra ¶ 83.
 [*P128]  Each of these points begins with a correct premise. But the court's starting premises do not support its broad, sweeping conclusions.
 [*P129]  On the first point, I can stipulate to a focus on "the status of the individual and the conduct to be protected" in deciding whether to endorse a new right of substantive due process. Supra ¶ 60. But that framing begs the question of what conduct, and at what level of generality to assess it. A broad framing would ask whether parental rights generally are subject to substantive due process protection. Yet that is not the only way to frame things. We could also look to the precise form of parental conduct at issue. And although the United States Supreme Court has not always been consistent on the appropriate framing, our recent precedent suggests a narrow framing that looks at the precise form of the relevant conduct.204 
 [*P130]  The United States Supreme Court has sometimes framed the inquiry into the existence of a new substantive due process right at the highest level of generality. When that court established new substantive due process rights to access contraception and abortion, for example, it framed the inquiry in broad, sweeping terms—whether there was an established tradition of respect for private decisions within a "zone of privacy."205  But the Court's case law has not been consistent. In other cases the court has called for a much narrower framing of the inquiry into the existence of a new substantive right. In rejecting a claim to a new right to physician-assisted suicide, for example, the court narrowly framed the inquiry in terms of a "right to commit suicide" instead of the proposed broader framing of a "right to die."206  This is a key, unresolved problem in the high court's substantive due process precedent, and a question that has attracted the attention of a range of commentators.207 
 [*P131]  A plurality of this court acknowledged this problem in our recent decision in In re Adoption of J.S., 2014 UT 51, 358 P.3d 1009. And it endorsed a requirement of narrowly framing any new, alleged right of substantive due process. To avoid the prospect of a court making new policy in the guise of constitutional law-making, the lead opinion in J.S. (which was joined by Chief Justice Durrant) endorsed a requirement that a party make "a specific showing that the precise interest asserted by the parent is one that is deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition and in the history and culture of Western civilization." Id. ¶ 57 (plurality opinion) (emphases added) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The "specific showing" of a "precise interest" suggested by J.S. is what I would require here—a showing not just of a well-rooted tradition of respect for parental rights generally, but of a tradition endorsing the right to retain parental rights without following procedural requirements set forth by law. The court's contrary approach not only cuts against the lead opinion in J.S; it also picks sides in a key point of debate in the law of substantive due process.
 [*P132]  The majority's second point is similarly problematic. The notion that a mother's rights need not be "perfected" in the manner required of unwed fathers is only half right. And the half-wrong part underscores the degree to which the majority is making new law while claiming only to be applying established precedent.
 [*P133]  It is of course true that a mother need not make a threshold showing of her parentage to establish her fundamental parental rights in the first instance. A mother's parental rights are perfected at the outset without any need for her to file a paternity petition or present evidence establishing the degree to which she supported or was willing to support her child. See Id. ¶ 2 (majority opinion). To that extent the majority is right to say that a mother's fundamental rights are not contingent on compliance with the "procedural requirement[s]" imposed by our law on fathers. Supra ¶ 83. But that is not the question presented here. The question here is whether a right that is admittedly perfected without the need for procedural compliance at one stage can ever be forfeited due to a procedural default at a later stage. The majority upholds that right as a matter of substantive due process. And in so doing it breaks significant new ground. No court has ever recognized this sort of right.208 
 [*P134]  It is true that I have cited no cases in which a biological mother forfeited her parental rights through procedural default, and a court upheld such default against a substantive due process challenge. See supra ¶ 79 (criticizing me for citing only cases involving putative fathers). But this is just a reflection of the fact that there are no reported cases that are directly on point—no case in which a mother forfeited her rights through procedural default, but a court excused that failure (and obviated her forfeiture) on the basis of a substantive due process right.
 [*P135]  Our decision in J.S. is the most obviously relevant precedent. In that case an unmarried biological father lost his parental rights as a result of a procedural default—failure to perfect his rights by jumping through the procedural hoops required by our law (principally, the filing of an affidavit of support of his child). 2014 UT 51, ¶ 1, 358 P.3d 1009. And we upheld those procedures against a substantive due process challenge. Id. ¶¶ 5-6. In so doing, as noted above, we required more than a showing of a tradition of respect for the parental rights of fathers generally—for their "status" and "conduct" at that level of generality. Instead we required the defaulting parent to demonstrate that the right to retain parental rights despite failing to comply with required procedure is "deeply rooted" in "history and tradition." Id. ¶ 54 (plurality opinion). This is also the showing we should require here.
 [*P136]  The procedure at issue in J.S. was admittedly not the sort of procedure that would be required of a mother for the preservation of her rights. The majority seizes on this point, noting that "mothers have a 'retained' fundamental right in their children, whereas unmarried fathers have only provisional rights that must be perfected through compliance with procedure." Supra ¶ 79. But again, this is a partial truism. All parties to litigation are bound by some procedure. And until today, no court had ever held that a fundamental parental right, once perfected, is subject only to those rules of procedure that can survive strict scrutiny review. The majority leans heavily on the "fundamental" nature of such rights to justify this result. But nowhere in the case law does the fact that a right is "fundamental" entitle its holder to forgo compliance with any procedure except that which withstands strict scrutiny. That conclusion certainly does not follow from the premise that the procedures necessary for a father's perfection of his parental rights at the outset do not apply to mothers in the first instance.209 
 [*P137]  A mother is not required to jump through procedural hoops to establish her parental rights in the first instance. But that is not because mothers are categorically exempt from the law of procedure. It is because they are not subject to a specific species of procedure—paternity filing requirements imposed on putative fathers before their rights can be perfected. See Utah Code § 78B-6-121(3) (in contrast to biological mothers, the "consent of an unmarried biological father [to an adoption] is not required unless . . . the unmarried biological father . . . initiates proceedings . . . to establish paternity" and complies with other procedures). For that reason, the majority's argument proves too much. Mothers are admittedly subject to some procedure. Rules of preservation in particular have always applied to all litigants. We cannot excuse a mother's compliance with the law of preservation just because mothers are exempt from compliance with other procedures.
 [*P138]  None of the majority's cited cases is a case like this one—in which a parent's rights were terminated as a result of the parent's procedural default. The court's cited cases stand for a threshold proposition that is not in dispute in this case. They say only that a person's parental rights may not be terminated by operation of a law that cuts off the right to be heard and substitutes instead a conclusive presumption of unfitness. That is the holding of Quilloin v. Walcott, 434 U.S. 246, 98 S. Ct. 549, 54 L. Ed. 2d 511 (1978), Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 92 S. Ct. 1208, 31 L. Ed. 2d 551 (1972), and In re J.P., 648 P.2d 1364 (Utah 1982). And that proposition has no purchase here. In this case the law did not authorize the termination of parental rights without an opportunity for a parent to be heard. It expressly provided for such an opportunity—and imposed a natural consequence (forfeiture by default) for the failure to comply with the required procedure. The question here, then, is whether a mother who lost her parental rights by forfeiture through procedural default may excuse that default by claiming a substantive due process right to ignore existing procedure (unless the procedure withstands strict scrutiny). And there is no support in any precedent for the establishment of such a right.
 [*P139]  The court's holding, in fact, runs directly counter to another line of precedent that the majority ignores. Voting rights are undoubtedly "fundamental" under a long line of United States Supreme Court authority. See Ill. State Bd. of Elections v. Socialist Workers Party, 440 U.S. 173, 184, 99 S. Ct. 983, 59 L. Ed. 2d 230 (1979); Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 336, 92 S. Ct. 995, 31 L. Ed. 2d 274 (1972); Williams v. Rhodes, 393 U.S. 23, 38, 89 S. Ct. 5, 21 L. Ed. 2d 24 (1968); Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356, 370, 6 S. Ct. 1064, 30 L. Ed. 220 (1886). But the United States Supreme Court has gone out of its way to emphasize that the fundamental nature of this right does not subject all procedural regulation of the right to strict scrutiny. See Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U.S. 428, 432-33, 112 S. Ct. 2059, 119 L. Ed. 2d 245 (1992); Munro v. Socialist Workers Party, 479 U.S. 189, 193, 107 S. Ct. 533, 93 L. Ed. 2d 499 (1986). In the voting rights realm, a neutral, nondiscriminatory regulation like a procedural default rule would not trigger strict scrutiny. Crawford v. Marion Cty. Election Bd., 553 U.S. 181, 203-04, 128 S. Ct. 1610, 170 L. Ed. 2d 574 (2008). It would trigger a deferential standard of scrutiny that would uphold the constitutionality of our neutral rules of procedural default. The same holds for regulation of other fundamental rights like the rights to privacy, free speech, and free exercise of religion. See infra ¶ 159 (discussing privacy, speech, and religion cases). And the majority's holding today is incompatible with all of these cases. See infra ¶¶ 160-65 (discussing the voting rights cases).
 [*P140]  The majority's basis for a substantive due process right to avoid the usual effect (forfeiture) of a procedural default is thus as novel as it is sweeping. The court's holding, moreover, will introduce substantial confusion and uncertainty going forward. If the majority opinion takes root, the whole idea of procedural regulation by a uniform set of rules will be placed in jeopardy. If our law requires case-by-case scrutiny of whether our procedural rules are the "least restrictive means" of advancing "compelling governmental interests," most any procedural default rule may be set aside as unconstitutional. Most procedural rules, after all, are in a sense arbitrary. That means that there will almost always be a less restrictive means of advancing the underlying goal. And that will open the door for our courts to second-guess a broad range of rules of procedural default whenever our judges think that the purpose of a governing rule could be advanced in a less restrictive way. This is problematic.
 [*P141]  I respectfully dissent for reasons explained in greater detail below. In Part I, I address the strict scrutiny argument—analyzing the cases cited in the mother's brief and applied by the majority, outlining the standard applied to regulation of the fundamental right to vote, and emphasizing the novel extension of the law endorsed by the majority opinion. Then in Part II, I identify the confusion and upheaval that the majority's framework will introduce into our law.
I
 [*P142]  The mother seeks to avoid the effects of forfeiture by asserting a substantive due process right. Yet she has failed to cite any precedent sustaining a substantive due process right to avoid the natural consequence (forfeiture) of a procedural default. And the majority opinion is similarly deficient.
 [*P143]  The fulcrum of the majority opinion is the notion that the mother has "fundamental rights" as a parent. The mother's brief is premised on the same notion. Citing In re J.P., 648 P.2d 1364 (Utah 1982) and Quilloin v. Walcott, 434 U.S. 246, 98 S. Ct. 549, 54 L. Ed. 2d 511 (1978), the mother asserts that the governing precedent "condemn[s] the termination of a mother's parental rights over her objection and without a finding of unfitness." And the majority correctly notes that the mother's parental rights include the right to object to an adoption. Supra ¶ 37.
 [*P144]  This is all correct as far as it goes. But the fundamental right recognized in the cited case law has no currency here. The mother's rights were not terminated "over her objection." She just failed to object under the procedures set forth in our law. The mother's right to object to an adoption is not a right to object in any manner she chooses. It is a right to object in accordance with prescribed procedure. And the natural consequence of the failure to comply with that procedure is a default—forfeiture of her rights.
 [*P145]  As the majority notes, our case law identifies a substantive due process basis for a party to establish an exception to this normal consequence—by providing proof of a "deeply rooted" history and tradition at a very specific level of generality. This is the standard set forth in In re J.P. and reinforced in J.S. But the mother has failed to carry her burden under these cases. She nowhere establishes a "deeply rooted" history and tradition of a right to preserve parental rights despite non-compliance with the procedure required by law. And her assertion of a substantive due process right accordingly fails.
 [*P146]  The majority objects to this framing of the right at issue. It contends that we should focus on "the status of the individual invoking the right"210  and "the parental conduct to be protected," supra ¶ 59, by asking "whether [such] parental conduct falls within the umbrella of protected parental rights," supra ¶ 63. That is fine as far as it goes. But the majority's approach—inquiring into the protected status of parental conduct—begs the question: at what level of generality should the relevant conduct be characterized in assessing whether it is protected by substantive due process? The majority rejects my narrow framing of the relevant conduct (whether there is a right to an exemption from procedural default) in favor of a much broader framing (whether there is a right to parent generally).211  But this is a disputed question implicating a serious and extensive debate in constitutional law. The level of generality at which an asserted right is framed can be outcome-determinative—the narrower the framing, the harder it will be to establish that the right is "deeply rooted" in history and tradition.
 [*P147]  The level of generality problem is on display in some of the United States Supreme Court's most prominent substantive due process decisions. Some of that court's most fractured, controversial decisions have implicated this problem. Yet the high court has never conclusively established a governing standard. The justices openly debated the question of the appropriate level of generality in Michael H. v. Gerald D., 491 U.S. 110, 127 n.6, 109 S. Ct. 2333, 105 L. Ed. 2d 91 (1989) (plurality opinion) (arguing for a framing at "the most specific level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified"); id. at 139 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (asserting that the inquiry should be framed broadly: "whether parenthood is an interest that historically has received our attention and protection"); id. at 132 (O'Connor, J., concurring in part) (criticizing the plurality's methodology as "inconsistent with our past decisions in this area" which sometimes "characterize[] [the] relevant traditions protecting asserted rights at levels of generality that might not be the most specific level available" (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)). But there was no majority view on the matter. And elsewhere the Court has been consistently inconsistent—sometimes framing the inquiry at a high level of generality, and sometimes opting for a much narrower framing of the proposed right at issue. See supra ¶ 130.
 [*P148]  Commentators have highlighted both the inconsistency in the United States Supreme Court's substantive due process framework and also its significance. In the words of one commentator, "the determination of whether history and tradition entitle a particular type of conduct to protection depends upon the breadth with which the Court defines the conduct in question." Rick Kozell, Note, Striking the Proper Balance: Articulating the Role of Morality in the Legislative and Judicial Processes, 47 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1555, 1572 (2011) (emphasis added). Another observes that "[t]he manner in which the court characterizes the issue critically defines the scope and boundaries of its reasoning and significantly impacts its holding," and emphasizes that the high court "fails to provide jurisprudence that is consistent enough to guide lower federal courts." John F. Basiak, Jr., Inconsistent Levels of Generality in the Characterization of Unenumerated Fundamental Rights, 16 U. Fla. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 401, 403, 405 (2005) (emphasis added). Professors Tribe and Dorf, for their part, acknowledge that "[t]he selection of a level of generality necessarily involves value choices," but argue in favor of a broad framing of the inquiry. See Laurence H. Tribe & Michael C. Dorf, Levels of Generality in the Definition of Rights, 57 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1057, 1058 (1990).
 [*P149]  The majority acknowledges the general point, but claims that the level of generality at which to frame the mother's asserted substantive due process right "is not an issue in this case." Supra ¶ 73. It argues that "[t]he level of generality at which an asserted right is framed may properly be considered an unresolved issue only where a party argues that the Due Process Clause protects someone whose (1) status or (2) conduct had not previously received constitutional protection." Supra ¶ 70. That is fine as far as it goes—I agree that once controlling precedent has established the relevant level of generality there is no reason to rehash the question. And I agree that the level of generality at which to frame the mother's asserted substantive due process right in this case is not an unresolved issue. But I think that our Utah case law, in J.S., prescribes a narrow framing for an alleged new substantive right, while the majority argues that our case law calls for a broad framing. Supra ¶ 73.
 [*P150]  In arguing for a broad framing, the majority leans heavily on the idea that in cases addressing termination of parental rights, "courts should define the parental right broadly to encompass the full spectrum of constitutionally protected parental conduct inherent in the parent-child relationship" because "the 'parental conduct' at issue in a parental rights termination case encompasses the entire bundle of parental rights." Supra ¶ 73. Again, however, the majority seems to conflate the parental conduct that is terminated (encompassing the "full spectrum of constitutionally protected parental conduct") with the conduct triggering that termination. See supra ¶ 146 n.211. And for the same reason the various propositions it attributes to its cited cases miss the mark. See supra ¶¶ 74-77 (for example emphasizing that In re J.P. "involve[d] a permanent termination of all parental rights" (alteration in original)).
 [*P151]  Our recent decision in J.S., however, speaks directly to the level of generality question. And unlike United States Supreme Court case law, our Utah case law not only acknowledges the problem but suggests an answer. The lead opinion in J.S. called for a narrow framing of any alleged, new substantive right—a framing that considers the precise form of the relevant conduct in assessing whether there is a sufficient history and tradition of protecting such conduct to justify the establishment of a new constitutional right. The requirement it put forth, specifically, is of "a specific showing that the precise interest asserted by the parent is one that is deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition and in the history and culture of Western civilization." In re Adoption of J.S., 2014 UT 51, ¶ 57, 358 P.3d 1009 (plurality opinion) (emphases added) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)). In explaining this requirement the J.S. opinion emphasized that the showing helps ensure that the power to establish new substantive due process rights is not transformed into a vehicle for judicial policy-making. See id. ¶ 61 (noting that "due process innovations" absent "any effective limiting principle" will put courts in the "problematic realm" of making "policy judgments[, which] are matters for legislative action" (plurality opinion) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 [*P152]  We should apply this standard here. We should require a "specific showing of a precise interest" before establishing a new right of substantive due process. That showing requires more than just a tradition of respecting parental rights generally. To establish this new right the mother must establish a tradition of protecting parental rights despite a procedural default. This is the framework suggested by J.S. And the majority does not present a satisfactory reason for departing from it on this high-stakes point of debate in the jurisprudence of substantive due process.212 
 [*P153]  In framing the right at issue broadly (and inconsistently with J.S.), the majority paints a picture of a disposition that follows naturally from settled precedent upholding the fundamental nature of parental rights generally. But framed properly, the specific right established by the majority can be seen for what it is—a novel holding in a case of first impression. No court has ever established a substantive due process right to override a forfeiture of parental rights resulting from a procedural default. This court has held, at most, that a mother has a fundamental right "not to be deprived of parental rights without a showing of unfitness, abandonment, or substantial neglect." In re J.P., 648 P.2d at 1375; see also Wells v. Children's Aid Soc. of Utah, 681 P.2d 199, 203 (Utah 1984). United States Supreme Court precedent is to the same effect. In Quilloin v. Walcott, the Court concluded that it would violate a right of substantive due process for the state "to force the breakup of a natural family, over the objections of the parents and their children, without some showing of unfitness and for the sole reason that to do so was thought to be in the children's best interest." 434 U.S. at 255. This same premise is inherent in the Court's analysis in Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 92 S. Ct. 1208, 31 L. Ed. 2d 551 (1972).
 [*P154]  This precedent tells us that strict scrutiny is triggered by a statute that authorizes the termination of a mother's parental rights over her properly asserted objection and without a requirement of proof of unfitness, abandonment, or neglect. But the Adoption Act did not authorize such termination.213  And strict scrutiny review is accordingly not triggered under the above cases.214 
 [*P155]  The key factual premise of the majority opinion is the notion that the district court "terminate[d] Mother's parental rights without her consent and without proof of parental unfitness, abandonment, or neglect." See supra ¶ 38. That is true as far as it goes. But that premise alone does not support the majority's conclusion that section 110 of the Adoption Act is subject to strict scrutiny. See supra ¶ 37. The majority opinion overlooks the crucial facts that the statute (a) retains the mother's right to insist on proof of unfitness, abandonment, or neglect as a precondition to the termination of her rights, and (b) outlines clear steps for the mother to take in order to preserve her right to assert her views on these matters before her rights were terminated (steps the majority concedes comply with the demands of procedural due process, see supra ¶¶ 22-30). The statute also prescribes clear consequences for the failure to follow the stated procedures. These include termination—not on the ground that the mother was unfit—but on the ground that she procedurally defaulted. The statute, in other words, did not take away the mother's right to insist that the court make a finding of unfitness before terminating her rights; the mother just forfeited that right by defaulting under the statute—by not filing the required motion to intervene.
 [*P156]  That leaves the question whether the mother may excuse her forfeiture by claiming a substantive due process right to ignore the procedural requirements of the Adoption Act. The majority concludes that the mother has that right. It says that "mothers retain a fundamental right in their children regardless of a failure to comply with any state-prescribed procedure." Supra ¶ 37 (emphasis added). The court cites no authority for that proposition. But the premise of its holding is the notion that a mother's parental rights are fundamental and that procedural compliance is not necessary to preserve their fundamental nature. Supra ¶ 88. In describing its holding, the court says that substantive due process "protects individuals from being deprived of fundamental rights through the operation of procedures that are not narrowly tailored to further compelling state interests." Supra ¶ 98.
 [*P157]  This is the essence of the court's holding. Because I oppose it, the court accuses me of creating a "novel framework" under which a fundamental right "can lose the protection of strict scrutiny review where the holder of the right fails to take on-going steps to preserve it." Supra ¶ 88. But the "novel framework" the majority accuses me of establishing is nothing more than the longstanding law of procedural default. And the fundamental nature of a parental right is in no way undermined by the determination that it is subject to such law.215 
 [*P158]  The case law in this field also does not sustain the majority's holding. An important line of precedent from the United States Supreme Court establishes that states retain the power to regulate even "fundamental" rights through procedure—and clearly rejects the notion that all such regulation is subject to strict scrutiny. The parental rights cases cited by the majority are not to the contrary. None of those cases comes close to establishing the substantive due process right established by the court today. The governing standard should be the one set forth in our opinion in J.S., and the mother has not come close to satisfying that standard.
A. Standards of Scrutiny for Regulation of Fundamental Rights
 [*P159]  The "fundamental" nature of a given right is not alone enough to trigger strict scrutiny of any procedural regulation of that right. The United States Supreme Court has applied something less than strict scrutiny review to the infringement of many fundamental rights, including the right to privacy, the right to freedom of speech, and the right to free exercise of religion. See generally, e.g., Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 120 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1992) (discarding the strict scrutiny-based abortion trimester framework of Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113, 93 S. Ct. 705, 35 L. Ed. 2d 147 (1973) for a more lenient "undue burden" test); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 88 S. Ct. 1673, 20 L. Ed. 2d 672 (1968) (applying a more deferential standard to content-neutral regulation of speech than the strict scrutiny generally triggered by content-based regulations); Employ't Div. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 110 S. Ct. 1595, 108 L. Ed. 2d 876 (1990) (holding strict scrutiny inappropriate for neutral and generally applicable laws burdening religious practice). One commentator looking at these trends has observed that "the notion that government restrictions on fundamental rights are [always] subject to strict scrutiny review is fundamentally wrong" because "[s]ome fundamental rights trigger intermediate scrutiny," some are "protected only by reasonableness or rational basis review," and others "are governed by categorical rules, with no formal 'scrutiny' or standard of review whatsoever." Adam Winkler, Fundamentally Wrong About Fundamental Rights, 23 CONST. COMMENT. 227, 227-28 (2006).216 
 [*P160]  The fact that fundamental rights do not always trigger the protection of strict scrutiny is made especially clear in a body of voting rights cases. The right to vote is described as "fundamental" in United States Supreme Court precedent. See Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U.S. 428, 433, 112 S. Ct. 2059, 119 L. Ed. 2d 245 (1992). But the high court has expressly rejected the proposition that this means that any regulation of this fundamental right triggers strict scrutiny. See id. at 432-34. In Burdick the Court described the idea that "a law that imposes any burden upon the [fundamental] right . . . must be subject to strict scrutiny" as an "erroneous assumption." Id. at 432. It also warned that a decision "to subject every . . . regulation [of a fundamental right] to strict scrutiny and to require that the regulation be narrowly tailored to advance a compelling state interest" would impermissibly "tie the hands of States." Id. at 433. With this in mind, the Court has applied different levels of scrutiny to various regulations of the fundamental right to vote, depending on the degree to which the regulation restricts the right.
 [*P161]  This framework is on display in Crawford v. Marion County Election Board, 553 U.S. 181, 128 S. Ct. 1610, 170 L. Ed. 2d 574 (2008), in which the Court upheld a challenge to the constitutionality of an Indiana voter identification law. The Crawford case failed to produce a majority opinion. But the plurality and concurring opinions set forth two frameworks for analysis that both repudiate the idea of strict scrutiny of all regulation of the fundamental right to vote. Justice Stevens' plurality opinion describes the operative regime as a "balancing approach" that weighs "the precise interests put forward by the State" against the "asserted injury to the right to vote." Id. at 190 (citation omitted). On the other hand, Justice Scalia's concurring opinion suggests that the Court applies a "two-track approach" that applies a "deferential 'important regulatory interests' standard for nonsevere, nondiscriminatory restrictions," and "strict scrutiny for laws that severely restrict the right to vote." Id. at 204-05.
 [*P162]  Thus, the United States Supreme Court has made clear that voting rights "are not absolute and are necessarily subject to qualification" by state regulation, Munro v. Socialist Workers Party, 479 U.S. 189, 193, 107 S. Ct. 533, 93 L. Ed. 2d 499 (1986), despite the fact that such rights are "of the most fundamental significance under our constitutional structure," Illinois State Bd. of Elections v. Socialist Workers Party, 440 U.S. 173, 184, 99 S. Ct. 983, 59 L. Ed. 2d 230 (1979). Regulation will invariably impose some burden on an individual's fundamental rights (to vote and associate freely). But the Court has nonetheless held that "as a practical matter, there must be . . . substantial regulation . . . if some sort of order, rather than chaos, is to accompany the democratic processes [of asserting these rights]." Storer v. Brown, 415 U.S. 724, 730, 94 S. Ct. 1274, 39 L. Ed. 2d 714 (1974).
 [*P163]  The same conclusion must logically hold in the realm of parental rights. Such rights have been acknowledged to be fundamental, but they are not beyond the procedural reach of the State's regulatory authority. And the mere fact that such rights are "fundamental" does not mean that any regulation of them is subject to strict scrutiny.
 [*P164]  The procedural regulation at issue here is admittedly distinct from that at issue in the above-cited voting rights cases. Here we are dealing with longstanding rules of procedural default. But that kind of regulation, if anything, would seem to trigger a more permissive standard of scrutiny—not strict scrutiny. Under either the balancing approach of the Crawford plurality or the two-track approach set forth in the concurrence, there is no basis for a strict scrutiny standard. Here we are dealing with the application of neutral, longstanding rules of procedure. Because such rules impose no significant burden on parental rights and are nondiscriminatory, the Crawford opinions suggest the applicability of a deferential standard of scrutiny.
 [*P165]  We have no briefing from the parties on this line of cases. And the majority opinion sidesteps them entirely. So we have no reason to render a conclusive holding on the effect of these cases on our decision. I cite them, however, because they thoroughly undermine the majority's notion that any regulation of a fundamental right is always subject to strict scrutiny.
B. Parental Rights Cases
 [*P166]  None of the majority's parental rights cases is to the contrary. The Quilloin case specifically identifies the forfeiture question that I have highlighted here but stops far short of establishing the substantive right to override a procedural default. And prior decisions of this court actively undermine the substantive due process extension established by the majority today. Our cases require far more than the vague assertion that a mother's parental rights, broadly framed, are "fundamental." The standard set forth in In re J.P. and reinforced by J.S. requires proof of a "deeply rooted" history and tradition at a very specific level of generality—here, a right to preserve a parental right despite non-compliance with the procedure required by law. The mother has failed to carry her burden under these cases. And her assertion of a substantive due process right to avoid forfeiture by procedural default should accordingly be rejected.
1. Quilloin v. Walcott
 [*P167]  The putative father in Quilloin had "never married . . . or established a home" with the mother of his child. 434 U.S. at 247. Soon after the child's birth, the mother married another man and consented to adoption of the child by her husband. Id. Mr. Quilloin "attempted to block the adoption and to secure visitation rights, but he did not seek custody or object to the child's continuing to live with [the mother and her husband]." Id. The Georgia court terminated his rights upon a finding that adoption of the child by the mother's husband "was in the 'best interests of [the] child.'" Id. at 251 (alteration in original). There was no determination of the putative father's unfitness. Id. at 252. And the putative father asserted that his substantive due process rights were infringed because the state lacked sufficient justification for terminating his parental rights. Id.
 [*P168]  The Quilloin court ruled against Mr. Quilloin. It did so on the basis of some core differences between the substantive interest established by Mr. Quilloin and that presented by the putative father in a prior parental rights case—Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 92 S. Ct. 1208, 31 L. Ed. 2d 551. The father in Stanley had lived with his children and their mother for many years. Id. at 646. And he had thereby established a commitment and connection by which his parental rights were deemed to be perfected. Id. at 652. With this in mind, the Stanley court struck down an Illinois statute as an infringement of the father's substantive due process rights. Id. at 659. The Illinois statute established a conclusive presumption that unwed fathers were unfit as parents as a matter of law. Id. at 649. And the Stanley court held that the statute infringed Mr. Stanley's fundamental parental rights because the state did not have a sufficiently compelling interest to terminate the rights of unwed fathers by operation of a legal presumption. Id. at 652-53.
 [*P169]  The Quilloin case was different. This was "not a case in which the unwed father at any time had, or sought, actual or legal custody of his child." 434 US at 255. And that fact was sufficient to substantially alter the balance at issue in the case—whether the state had a sufficient reason to justify terminating Mr. Quilloin's parental rights without proof of unfitness.
 [*P170]  The Court expressed "little doubt" that it would violate a right of substantive due process for the state "to force the breakup of a natural family, over the objections of the parents and their children, without some showing of unfitness and for the sole reason that to do so was thought to be in the children's best interest." Id. But the Court found that Mr. Quilloin's substantive interests were outweighed by the state's in these circumstances. It thus upheld the substantive authority of the state to terminate Mr. Quilloin's parental rights as a matter of law—explaining that it could not "say that the State was required in this situation to find anything more than that the adoption, and denial of legitimation, were in the 'best interests of the child.'" Id.
 [*P171]  Georgia law, as the Court noted, afforded to putative fathers a procedural mechanism for perfecting their parental rights. That mechanism was the filing of a "legitimation petition." Id. at 253. Such a petition would have given Mr. Quilloin the same right to veto an adoption petition that a mother (or married father) had. See id. at 249. If Mr. Quilloin had filed such a petition, he could have objected to the adoption of his child, precluding the termination of his parental rights except upon a finding of unfitness. Id. Yet he failed to do so. The Georgia court concluded that Mr. Quilloin lacked standing to challenge the adoption on that basis. And the Supreme Court ultimately reversed the judgment of the Georgia court on substantive due process grounds. But the Quilloin court was not holding that the father's procedural default or forfeiture could be excused on substantive due process grounds. It stopped far short of establishing a substantive due process right for a parent to retain parental rights "regardless of a failure to comply with any state-prescribed procedure." Supra ¶ 37.
 [*P172]  The Quilloin majority begins by noting an argument made by the adoptive parents (an argument that aligns precisely with the approach I am proposing in this case)—the notion that "due process was not violated, regardless of the standard applied by the trial court, since any constitutionally protected interest appellant might have had was lost by his failure to petition for legitimation during the 11 years prior to [the] filing" of the adoption petition. 434 U.S. at 254. This is a straightforward forfeiture argument. It is the idea that the father's substantive due process argument is foreclosed because the State afforded the father a right to assert his interests and he failed to avail himself of that procedure. It says that "regardless" of the substantive standard applied for balancing the putative father's interests against the state's, the putative father loses because he stands in default or forfeiture by not having availed himself of a preservation procedure for asserting his interests.
 [*P173]  The Quilloin court expressly avoided this basis for disposition. And it did so in a way that undermines the majority's assertion that the Quilloin line of cases sustains the substantive due process right that the court establishes today. After noting the adoptive parents' argument, the court expressed concern about resting its judgment on this basis. It concluded that it didn't need to address the forfeiture argument "since under the circumstances of th[e] case [Mr. Quilloin's] substantive rights were not violated by application of a 'best interests of the child' standard." Id. The Court's point was that it didn't matter whether Mr. Quilloin might lose on forfeiture grounds because his substantive argument failed in any event. See id. (noting "hesitat[ion]" regarding "rest[ing] [a] decision on this ground, in light of evidence in the record that appellant was not aware of the legitimation procedure until after the adoption petition was filed").
 [*P174]  This makes clear that the Quilloin court was not saying that a substantive due process defect can cure a party's procedural default or forfeiture. It was saying it didn't need to address the procedural default because the substantive due process claim failed on its merits in any event. This highlights a key shortcoming of the majority opinion. It clarifies that the United States Supreme Court has never recognized a substantive due process right for a parent to preserve her parental rights despite a prior procedural default.
2. In re J.P.
 [*P175]  The same goes for our case law. Utah Supreme Court precedent has come nowhere close to endorsing the right established by the court today. And in fact, our cases chart a burden for establishing a substantive due process right that the mother in this case has not carried.
 [*P176]  In In re J.P. we emphasized the importance of framing substantive due process rights narrowly and embedding the analysis in premises that are "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition" and in the "history and culture of Western civilization." 648 P.2d at 1375 (citations omitted). We warned of the perils of "innovations" in substantive due process extensions premised on "undisciplined . . . abstract formulae." Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). And with this concern in mind, we framed the substantive due process in precise, specific terms. We did not frame the inquiry at a high level of generality by simply stating that a parent has a vague right that is "fundamental," and proceed from that sweeping premise to our own formulation of the appropriate nature and extent of that right. Instead we recognized a narrow, specific right—the "right of a parent not to be deprived of parental rights without a showing of unfitness, abandonment, or substantial neglect." Id. And we based that conclusion not on our own sense of the policies supporting this sort of right, but on the fact that firmly rooted "history" and longstanding tradition of the "common law" had established such a right. Id.
 [*P177]  Our framing of the analysis in J.P. is significant. We based our determination of a substantive due process right on longstanding history and tradition. And we framed the recognized right at a highly specific level. We came nowhere close to employing substantive due process in a manner giving a parent a substantive right to avoid a default resulting from the failure to follow procedures required by law.
 [*P178]  The J.P. framework requires proof of established history and tradition at a precise level of specificity. It is not enough to assert generally that a mother's parental rights are fundamental. To succeed under J.P., the mother would have to present evidence of an established history and tradition of a right of mothers "not to be deprived of parental rights despite failure to comply with procedure afforded to allow the mother to assert her interests." And the mother here has made no such showing, as I explain further below.
3. In re J.S.
 [*P179]  The majority also claims support for its substantive due process analysis in our decision in In re Adoption of J.S., 2014 UT 51, 358 P.3d 1009. Citing J.S., the majority says that "a substantive due process claim may be brought where otherwise fair procedures are alleged to be unfair in light of the 'fundamental or important' right they foreclose." Supra ¶ 85 (citation omitted). Because the mother's right to parent her child is concededly fundamental, the majority says that J.S. establishes a basis for substantive scrutiny of the fairness of the procedures set forth in the Adoption Act—and thus a basis for concluding that the mother in this case has a right to retain her parental rights despite her failure to comply with required procedures.
 [*P180] J.S. does not support the majority's approach, however. In fact, the standard set forth in J.S. reiterates and extends the warnings stated in J.P. J.S. nowhere endorses the idea of a substantive due process right to retain parental rights despite failure to comply with required procedure. Certainly it doesn't say that such a right can be premised purely on the general notion that a mother's parental rights are "fundamental." Instead it asks for proof at a highly specific level of generality.
 [*P181]  In J.S. the father asserted a "substantive right" to establish his parentage without complying with the procedural elements of the statute. 2014 UT 51, ¶ 24, 358 P.3d 1009. The governing procedure under the Adoption Act in J.S. was the requirement that a putative father file a detailed affidavit to preserve his parental rights. Utah Code § 78B-6-121(3). And the father sought to assert a "due process challenge . . . to the 'substantive constitutionality of the affidavit requirement at issue,' while emphasizing that that claim subsisted regardless of whether the statutory limitations in question were 'applied in a procedurally fair manner.'" In re Adoption of J.S., 2014 UT 51, ¶ 27, 358 P.3d 1009. Thus, the father "repeatedly characterize[d] his claim as one challenging the statutory affidavit requirement as 'substantively unconstitutional,'" or in other words as "aimed at establishing a 'fundamental,' 'substantive right' of an unwed father as a parent" without complying with the statutory affidavit requirement. Id. ¶ 24.
 [*P182]  In this sense J.S. is directly applicable to this case. As in this case, the question in J.S. came down to whether there was a substantive due process right to preserve parentage without complying with the procedural requirements of the law. But the standard set forth by the J.S. opinion is not at all compatible with the approach taken by the majority today. J.S. acknowledges the possibility of a limited form of substantive scrutiny of procedure—in a case in which a party can show not only that a general right or interest is "fundamental," but also that there is an established, longstanding tradition entitling a party to the protection of such right without compliance with procedures prescribed by the government. See id. ¶ 57 (plurality opinion) (explaining that a party would need to "establish a specific showing that the precise interest asserted by the parent is one that is deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition and in the history and culture of Western civilization" (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). In other words, J.S. speaks to the appropriate level of generality at which to frame an inquiry into the existence of a substantive due process right. It suggests a specific and narrow framing—not the broad, sweeping level of generality that the majority today espouses.217 
 [*P183]  In articulating this standard, the J.S. opinion went out of its way to warn of the "slippery slope problems" associated with any decision to endorse a new substantive due process right in this field. Id. ¶ 59 (plurality opinion). It noted that the father asserted a broad historical basis for recognizing the rights of unwed fathers. But it concluded that that was insufficient. The putative father had failed "to identify any longstanding, widespread basis in our history and culture for recognizing a perfected right in unmarried biological fathers arising upon their mere filing of a paternity suit (and without following other requirements set forth by law)." Id. (emphasis added). And it noted that "[e]ndorsement of a substantive right in this case would inevitably lead to a series of line-drawing problems going forward, requiring courts to make policy judgments about whether the biological father before the court had done enough to properly justify the recognition of his parental rights." Id. ¶ 60. J.S. explained that such "policy judgments are matters for legislative action." Id. ¶ 61.
 [*P184] J.S. also noted that "[o]ur legislature has spoken to th[e] question" of where to draw the line on the procedure for a putative father to preserve the assertion of his parental rights—"prescribing a series of prerequisites" to the assertion of his rights. Id. It rejected the putative father's attempt to "second-guess those requirements" by "establish[ing] a substantive due process right to perfect his parental rights on something less than the grounds prescribed by the legislature—by filing a paternity action but not the affidavit called for by statute." Id. "Doing so," the plurality explained, "would put us in the problematic realm of making 'due process innovations' dictated by 'abstract formulae' and without any effective limiting principle." Id. And with this in mind it held the putative father to the substantive due process standard quoted above—a standard framed at a specific level of generality.
 [*P185]  The opinion also connected this standard to the law of procedural default or forfeiture. It noted that the putative father in that case was merely "claim[ing] that he ignored" the procedural requirements of our law "on the (bad) advice of counsel." Id. ¶ 63. And while acknowledging that this was "unfortunate," it emphasized that "bad legal advice is no excuse for failure to follow" procedural prerequisites to the assertion of a party's legal rights, noted that "our legal system treats attorneys as agents for their clients," and explained that we "deem clients responsible for the decisions they make on advice of counsel." Id.
 [*P186] J.S. thus emphasizes the narrowness of the operative notion of substantive due process. In rejecting the father's substantive due process claim in that case, the lead opinion explained that the father had failed to "make the kind of showing," id. ¶ 58," needed to establish such a right—proof of a "longstanding, widespread basis in our history and culture for recognizing a perfected right in unmarried biological fathers arising upon their mere filing of a paternity suit (and without following other requirements set forth by law)," id. ¶ 59. And it also connected this strict standard of substantive due process to the law of procedural default or forfeiture.
 [*P187]  The above bears no resemblance to the standard applied by the majority in this case. The majority invokes J.S. in support of a substantive standard of scrutiny of the statutory procedure under review—here, the requirement of a motion to intervene. See supra ¶¶ 84-86. And it roots its holding in the bare notion that a mother's rights in a child are "fundamental"—presupposing that the inquiry should be framed at a broad, sweeping level of generality. See supra ¶¶84-86. But that is not the approach taken in J.S. J.S. took the substantive due process claim at issue on its own terms—framing it at a highly specific level of generality. And the plurality in J.S. rejected that claim on the ground that the father had not established a basis in history and tradition for the notion of a substantive right—narrowly framed—to preserve parental rights without complying with the established statutory procedure.
 [*P188] J.S. thus charts a narrow, limited domain for a claimed substantive right to preserve parental rights despite a party's default under established procedure. And it highlights the novelty—and error—in the majority's decision to endorse a substantive right to preserve parental rights despite a procedural default under the law.218 
4. In re B.Y.
 [*P189]  The majority also claims support for its approach in In re Adoption of B.Y., 2015 UT 67, 356 P.3d 1215. Citing B.Y., the majority says that our substantive due process analysis opens the door to scrutiny of the "fairness" of a "procedural bar or limitation" in a statute "on the ground that the right foreclosed is so fundamental or important that it is protected from extinguishment." Supra ¶¶ 31, 98. Because the mother's right to parent her child is concededly fundamental, the majority says that B.Y. establishes a basis for substantive scrutiny of the fairness of the procedures set forth in the Adoption Act—and thus a basis for concluding that the mother in this case has a right to retain her parental rights despite her failure to comply with required procedures. Supra ¶¶ 31, 98. But the B.Y. opinion is consistent with Quilloin, J.P., and J.S—it comes nowhere close to establishing a substantive due process right to retain parental rights despite a procedural default.
 [*P190]  In B.Y. a putative father sought to challenge the Adoption Act's mandate of "strict compliance" with the procedural requirements of the statute—specifically, the requirement of filing a paternity action prior to the mother's consent or relinquishment of the child for adoption. 2015 UT 67, 356 P.3d 1215; Utah Code § 78B-6-121(3) (The "consent of an unmarried biological father is not required unless, prior to the time the mother executes her consent for adoption or relinquishes the child for adoption, the unmarried biological father . . . initiates proceedings . . . to establish paternity . . . ."). Despite the failure to fulfill this procedural requirement, the father in B.Y. asserted that he "did enough to 'grasp' his 'opportunity . . . to develop a relationship with his offspring'" to perfect a fundamental parental right under United States Supreme Court precedent. 2015 UT 67, ¶ 42, 356 P.3d 1215 (omission in original). And he asserted that the strict compliance requirement infringed his substantive due process rights as a parent.
 [*P191]  We acknowledged the possibility of a substantive due process claim in this realm, but we rejected it on its merits. We noted that "[a]n unwed father's rights are merely provisional," emphasized that he "must comply with legal prerequisites established by the state" to perfect such rights, and concluded that "[f]ailure to do so leaves the father's parental rights without any substantive protection—except in the narrow circumstance in which the prerequisites established by the state are arbitrary." Id. ¶ 43. In so doing we emphasized that "[t]he Due Process Clause . . . is not a license for courts to second-guess the prerequisites established by the legislature for a putative father to perfect his parental rights." Id. ¶ 44. "Instead," we said that "the well-settled standard yields substantial deference to the state's chosen prerequisites." Id. And we explained that "[i]t does so in light of the state's important interest in 'immediate and secure adoptions for eligible newborns.'" Id. We held that the putative father's claim "fail[ed] under this standard." Id. ¶ 46.
 [*P192]  The majority seeks to distinguish B.Y. and to claim support for its approach in that opinion. It says that B.Y. supports the application of a standard of strict scrutiny in assessing the "fairness" of the procedure set forth in the Adoption Act—the requirement of filing a motion to intervene. Supra ¶¶ 31, 98. And it bases that determination on the fact that this case involves the parental rights of a mother, which are automatically "fundamental," while B.Y. involved the rights of a putative father, which are "merely provisional." Supra ¶ 35. The point is correct as far as it goes. But until today, no court has ever extended it in the manner endorsed by the majority. The majority is of course right to say that a biological mother's rights are inherently and automatically "fundamental" under the law. And the court is equally correct in its observation that the parent's alleged right in B.Y. was inchoate or "merely provisional." This was, moreover, a key basis for our decision in B.Y. The substantive due process claim in B.Y. was deficient because a putative father's provisional right required additional acts on the father's part before the right could be perfected as fundamental. And we had no trouble rejecting the father's substantive due process right in light of the cited premises in our case law—the need for "substantial deference" to the state's chosen procedural "prerequisites" to the establishment of a parental right, and the substantial basis for protecting "the state's important interest in 'immediate and secure adoptions for eligible newborns.'" B.Y., 2015 UT 67, ¶ 44, 356 P.3d 1215.
 [*P193]  But the majority's analysis assumes that a fundamental right once acquired is therefore insulated against forfeiture through procedural default. The court cites no case law in support of its decision to establish a new substantive right to retain a fundamental parental right despite procedural default. And such a right does not at all follow from the fact that the underlying right is itself protected as a matter of substantive due process. Again, a mother's parental rights are automatically fundamental in the sense that she is not required to jump through the procedural hoops to perfect those rights required of fathers under our case law. See J.S., 2014 UT 51, ¶ 2, 358 P.3d 1009 (explaining requirements for fathers to file paternity petitions and present evidence regarding their support of the child to make a threshold showing of parentage and perfect their parental rights). But the connection between procedural compliance and the initial perfection of parental rights is beside the point here. Here the parental right at issue is admittedly perfected (and was so without the need for the procedural compliance required of fathers), so the question is whether that concededly perfected right can later be forfeited through procedural default. By holding that it cannot, the majority establishes a new right of substantive due process.
 [*P194]  The majority repeatedly insists otherwise. Citing cases establishing a mother's lack of need for procedural compliance at the perfection stage, it says that the mother must likewise have no obligation to comply with another set of procedures (for preservation) at a later stage. Supra ¶¶ 36-37; 79-91. But this is a big step. The fact that a mother need not jump through procedural hoops to perfect her parental rights not only bears on a different stage of procedural compliance; it also has no bearing on procedural default generally.
 [*P195]  The mother is not required to jump through procedural hoops to establish her parental rights in the first instance. But that is not because her fundamental parental rights encompass a right to flout procedural requirements generally. It is because there is an established tradition—framed in narrow, specific terms—of respecting a mother's rights without any requirement of any procedural act aimed at perfecting those rights. That tradition is reflected in the fact that the law does not extend the requirement of compliance with this procedure to mothers. See Utah Code § 78B-6-121(3).
 [*P196]  None of these premises apply to the procedures at issue here. The procedural rules of preservation assuredly do apply to both mothers and fathers. And in the absence of evidence of an established tradition allowing a mother to retain her rights despite a failure to comply with those rules, the court has no basis to establish the existence of such a right.
 [*P197]  By focusing on the difference between mothers' and fathers' rights at the threshold stage of perfection and importing that distinction to any later instance of procedural default, the majority also ignores the fact that the state's interest in procedural compliance at these later stages is the same for both mothers and fathers. The fact that the mother's rights are automatically fundamental does not mean that she can blithely avoid any need to follow state procedure in an adoption proceeding.
 [*P198]  The Adoption Act's procedural requirements are not aimed only at putative fathers. They are also aimed at mothers. See Utah Code § 78B-6-110(6)(a) (requiring that a mother, or any other party who receives notice of adoption, must file motion to intervene in adoption proceeding within 30 days); id. § 78B-6-110(6)(b) (stating that a mother who fails to "fully and strictly comply" with this requirement "forfeits all rights in relation to the adoptee"). And the legislature has articulated substantial interests that are advanced by requiring a mother to intervene as a party and assert her position regarding any claimed basis for termination of her rights (such as unfitness, abandonment, or neglect). The legislature has expressly found, for example, that "the state has a compelling interest in providing stable and permanent homes for adoptive children in a prompt manner, in preventing the disruption of adoptive placements, and in holding parents accountable for meeting the needs of children." Id. § 78B-6-102(5)(a). It has also concluded that "adoptive children have a right to permanence and stability in adoptive placements." Id. § 78B-6-102(5)(c). These are important concerns. And they are obviously furthered by a requirement that a mother intervene as a party in a timely fashion and assert any proffered challenge to termination of her parental rights. Failure to do so results in a forfeiture of those rights. Neither the mother nor the majority has identified any basis in the law of forfeiture by procedural default or in the Adoption Act to contradict that conclusion.
 [*P199]  The state's interests in assuring "stable and permanent homes for adoptive children in a prompt manner" and "preventing the disruption of adoptive placements" thus remain intact whether the parental rights at stake are those of a biological mother or a putative father. See id. Utah Code § 78B-6-102(5)(a). And it is in this sense that the question of perfection is irrelevant. It is not—as the majority suggests—a threshold question that can obviate the need to establish a historical basis for noncompliance with governing procedure. The historical inquiry is not aimed at finding a basis for whether the parent's right is fundamental or not. The historical inquiry is aimed at finding a basis for noncompliance with procedure despite holding fundamental parental rights. It bears repeating that no court has ever established a substantive due process right of a mother to retain her parental rights despite defaulting those rights under governing procedure. We certainly didn't establish such a right in B.Y. In fact, B.Y. left intact the standard put forth in J.S.—a standard that requires much more than a mere challenge to the "unfairness" of procedure for preserving parental rights, and that instead requires a deeply rooted historical basis for a fundamental right to retain parental rights despite failing to comply with the governing procedure. And, again, the mother has not come close to carrying that burden here, as discussed in more detail below.
 [*P200] J.S., admittedly, is not a case involving a biological mother's forfeiture of parental rights through procedural default. So it is true that my proposed disposition would be an extension of J.S. insofar as that case did not involve a substantive due process challenge to forfeiture of a mother's parental rights. But this only buttresses my point that this a case of first impression. And J.S. is our most relevant precedent, both bearing on forfeiture of parental rights through procedural default and suggesting a position in the levels of generality debate discussed above. See supra ¶¶ 179-88. The J.S. plurality advocated for a specific framing of the new right proposed to be established as a matter of substantive due process. And because the framing question is independent of whether a parent is a father or a mother, it bears directly on today's case and I would apply it.
 [*P201]  The majority charges me with mischaracterizing the right at issue. It complains that I am "mark[ing] a fundamental departure from the way courts have traditionally defined parental rights." Supra ¶ 55. I am puzzled by this charge. I concede that there is a lot of novelty in this case. But the novelty comes from the majority's extension of the law of substantive due process—from its reframing of the alleged new right at the highest level of generality.
 [*P202]  The cases I have cited admittedly deal only with the rights of putative fathers. But it does not at all follow that a mother's rights are insulated from procedural default. The mother, as noted, is not required to jump through procedural hoops to protect her rights at the outset. But the majority is seizing on a false procedural equivalence in insisting that that means she can never be subject to any procedure at any stage. The majority is accordingly right to highlight the novelty of this case. The novelty, however, is entirely in the majority opinion.
C. Application of the Governing Standard
 [*P203]  For the above reasons there is no basis in existing case law for the establishment of a substantive due process right for a mother to avoid the usual effect (forfeiture) of a procedural default. Certainly that does not follow from the premise that a mother's rights are unquestionably "fundamental." Much more analytical work is required under the above precedent. To sustain a right to preserve parental rights despite the failure to comply with established procedure, the mother should be required to make a showing at a specific level of generality based on firmly rooted history and tradition. See In re Adoption of J.S., 2014 UT 51, ¶ 57, 358 P.3d 1009 (plurality opinion). She should have to show not just the general notion of a fundamental right as a mother, but a right to preserve her rights without complying with established statutory procedure.
 [*P204]  The mother has made no effort at such a showing. Instead she claims only (a) that mothers generally have rights that are automatically fundamental, and (b) that the procedure required by the Adoption Act is generally "unfair." The majority opinion's analysis is to the same effect. See supra ¶ 37 (asserting that "[a] right of a mother not to be deprived of parental rights without a showing of unfitness, abandonment, or substantial neglect is . . . fundamental" (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)).219 
 [*P205]  This falls far short under our law. And the mother's substantive due process claim should be rejected on the ground that she has failed to carry the heavy burden set forth in our cases—a burden that the majority distorts in its decision today. Contrary to the majority's claim, I am not saying that the substantive due process right at issue is defined by "referencing the form of governmental interference." Supra ¶ 65. I am simply saying that the established procedures determine how and whether such a right is preserved.
 [*P206]  It is tempting to see a technical defect in procedural compliance as a matter that should lightly be excused. But procedural rules are always two-edged. There is always an interest on the other side of the equation. And the procedural requirements of the Adoption Act are no exception.
 [*P207]  The adoption arena is one where strict procedural compliance is at a premium. The state has a compelling interest in "providing stable and permanent homes for adoptive children in a prompt matter" and "preventing the disruption of adoptive placements." Utah Code § 78B-6-102(5)(a). To serve the interest of protecting "the welfare of the child, a determination that a child can be adopted must be final as well as immediate." Wells v. Children's Aid Soc. of Utah, 681 P.2d 199, 203 (Utah 1984). And statutory procedures for natural parents to participate in and assert their rights in adoption proceedings are a core element of this system.
 [*P208]  We have long respected the interests advanced by the procedural requirements of the Adoption Act. We should continue do so here. The state's interests in stability and finality are no less substantial here—in a case involving a biological mother. And the majority has identified no legal basis for avoiding this conclusion.
II
 [*P209]  In setting the procedural rules for participation in an adoption proceeding, our legislature could have required that a biological mother be formally named as a party and served with a summons and petition for adoption. Some other states structure their law in this way.220  And I can see an argument for favoring this sort of scheme. If I were a legislator I might be tempted to vote for this kind of adoption regime.
 [*P210]  But I am not a legislator. And we are not being asked to take on the role of super-legislature. We are being asked to decide whether the constitution invalidates the adoption provisions that were enacted into law by the legislature that was elected into office by the people. The answer to that question is no. The majority breaks new constitutional ground in concluding otherwise. It cites no on-point precedent to support its novel adoption of a substantive due process right to override the effect that our law has long prescribed for a party's procedural default—forfeiture of the party's rights.
 [*P211]  The majority's due process standard, moreover, threatens a wide range of adoption procedures in place in numerous states across the nation. Procedural default is a well-established basis for the termination of parental rights.221  Yet the majority's standard calls this basis into question. When parental rights are terminated as a result of a mother's procedural default, the effect will always come about without proof of unfitness, abandonment, or neglect. And this effect, in the majority's view, will always trigger strict scrutiny. Supra ¶ 37. This sweeping extension of strict scrutiny threatens the viability of the procedures and rules of procedural default or forfeiture. The majority seeks to mask this upheaval by emphasizing the "narrowness" of its holding, insisting that procedures regulating fundamental rights may yet be preserved—so long as they are "'narrowly tailored' to protect a 'compelling governmental interest.'" Jones v. Jones, 2015 UT 84, ¶ 27, 359 P.3d 603 (quoting Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 721, 117 S. Ct. 2258, 117 S. Ct. 2302, 138 L. Ed. 2d 772 (1997)).
 [*P212]  But this is no real brake on the majority's approach. The majority holds that a party's noncompliance with procedure is excused (on substantive due process grounds) so long as the purpose of a procedural requirement is fulfilled. See supra ¶¶ 47-48. The standard states, in other words, that a procedural requirement whose purpose can be fulfilled in an alternative manner is a procedural requirement that is not narrowly tailored.
 [*P213]  And that is a principle with unlimited potential for mischief. The application of a strict scrutiny standard to procedural regulation of fundamental rights forecloses the whole idea of regulation by a uniform set of procedural rules. If the majority's approach takes root, our law will require case-by-case analysis of the viability of any and all procedural rules that may sustain the sanction of a default of a fundamental right. And this will undermine the whole point of procedural regulation. Our rules will be pointless if parties can ignore them and instead secure personalized standards set by the courts on a case-by-case basis.
 [*P214]  The majority's framework calls into question a broad range of established procedures. The majority seeks to minimize the impact of its decision. Supra ¶ 37 n.67. But it has identified no meaningful limiting principle. Almost all procedure is not narrowly tailored. Most all procedural rules, by nature, are in a sense quite arbitrary. And that means that there will almost always be a less restrictive means of advancing the underlying goal.
 [*P215]  Consider a standard procedural time bar, like a requirement that a party file an answer within thirty days, or a response to a motion for summary judgment within a prescribed timeframe. If a mother fails to file a timely answer or response to the motion her case may be defaulted. Does the principle of substantive due process give her the right to ignore the time limits in our rules because the time limits we have prescribed are arbitrary numbers and the underlying purpose is still served by a late filing? That is not how our law of procedure works. And the doctrine of substantive due process has never been employed in a manner calling into question the enforceability of the procedural default rules built into our law of procedure.
 [*P216]  Procedural default rules serve the state's compelling interests in promoting prompt and stable adoptions. See supra ¶ 42 (citing Thurnwald v. A.E., 2007 UT 38, ¶¶ 30, 34, 163 P.3d 623). But such rules may often not be the least restrictive means of advancing those interests. When a rule of procedural default is not the least restrictive means of advancing the state's interests, the rule will be struck down as unconstitutional. And this will upset longstanding principles of procedural default and forfeiture—and undercut the reliance interests of adoptive parents and children. See supra ¶¶ 42, 82.
 [*P217]  The majority opens the door to a new frontier of substantive due process scrutiny—scrutiny of the fairness of the procedures prescribed for the procedural default or forfeiture of legal rights. If the majority opinion is taken to its logical end, the law of procedural default or forfeiture will be forever pressed into a state of limbo. And parties in cases involving fundamental rights will stand in a particular state of unease.
 [*P218]  Today we speak only to the rights of parents. But the logic of today's decision sweeps much more broadly. As framed by the court, it would cover any of a wide range of other fundamental rights—including the right to liberty (freedom from incarceration) or the right to vote. Our laws require those asserting their interest in freedom from incarceration to comply with procedural rules in the law of preservation. See, e.g., Utah Code § 78B-9-106 (precluding relief under the Postconviction Remedies Act on any ground that "could have been but was not raised at trial or on appeal" or that "is barred by the limitation period established in Section 78B-9-107"); see also, e.g., Taylor v. State, 2012 UT 5, 270 P.3d 471 (rejecting defendant's Postconviction Remedies Act claims because they were procedurally barred). The same goes for fundamental rights like the right to vote. See, e.g., Utah Code § 20A-2-102.5 (establishing a voter registration deadline with limited exceptions). In the wake of today's decision the parties to a case involving these and other fundamental rights should be on notice that the usual effect of a procedural default (forfeiture) may not hold. The courts will retain the prerogative of second-guessing these procedures—and may set them aside if the majority's strict scrutiny standard is taken seriously.
 [*P219]  This is troubling. The majority's novel approach threatens the very foundations of the law of procedural default or forfeiture. And it places no meaningful limit on judicial discretion to second-guess the law in this field. Our precedent has charted a more principled course for recognizing viable substantive due process claims. I would apply that precedent here. And I would conclude that the mother has failed to carry her burden of proving a deeply rooted historical basis for a fundamental right to retain parental rights despite failing to comply with the governing procedure.

 

