
 [*P38]  I agree with the judgment of the court but write separately to highlight a disagreement with the majority's analysis on a threshold issue. Specifically, though I would affirm the dismissal of Winward's PCRA petition as time-barred, I would do so by expressly repudiating the "egregious injustice" exception invoked by the court.
 [*P39]  We have no authority to apply such an exception. It is a remnant of a long-since repealed section of the PCRA,1  which we of course have no business reviving through our case law. Our authority to invoke exceptions not codified in the PCRA is necessarily limited to—and defined by—our interpretation of the constitutional provisions that dictate the scope of the right of post-conviction review by extraordinary writ. Because there is no viable challenge to PCRA's time bar before us, we should apply the statute as written and decline the invitation to invoke presumed exceptions to it.
 [*P40]  The majority's objections to this approach are twofold: (a) the constitutional objections to the PCRA's time-bar provision were not raised by Winward below and were thus waived; and (b) it is "improvident" to address constitutional questions that are not amply briefed by the parties, and preferable to avoid the matter by assuming arguendo the power to apply an exception (styled a "threshold test") set forth in a repealed statutory provision. I disagree with both points.
 [*P41]  Though Winward failed to preserve an express constitutional challenge to the PCRA's time bar, see supra ¶¶ 8-11, his invocation of the "egregious injustice" exception to the PCRA rests on an implied—but nonetheless clear—constitutional premise. Our authority (if any) to recognize an exception outside the bounds of the PCRA must necessarily be rooted in the constitution. There is no other possible basis for an extra-statutory exception. By invoking the "egregious injustice" exception, therefore, Winward necessarily raised the question whether there is any constitutional basis for it.
 [*P42]  Our precedents are hardly a barrier to reaching this question—or for deeming Winward to have waived it. Although we have recently proceeded on the arguendo assumption of judicial power to invoke exceptions outside the statute, our cases neither identify any basis to do so nor resolve the matter conclusively. Under the circumstances, the parties can hardly be faulted for failing to analyze squarely the question of the constitutional basis for our authority in this area.
 [*P43]  Now that this fundamental question has been identified (as it was at oral argument in this case), however, we can hardly proceed without addressing it on its merits. If we are to apply an "egregious injustice" exception, we must first identify the nature of our authority to do so. We cannot defensibly find such an exception unsatisfied without describing its content, and we cannot describe its content without articulating its basis in law. A decision in this case accordingly requires an analysis of this question, which is properly—if implicitly and without ample briefing—presented to us.
 [*P44]  The court's contrary conclusion purports to find root in a principle of judicial restraint—of avoiding the constitutional question of the scope of our authority to invoke extra-statutory exceptions to the PCRA's time-bar rule in light of the parties' inadequate briefing. Supra ¶ 18. Yet in its application, the court necessarily (if implicitly) decides the very question it purports to avoid. Specifically, in concluding that Winward cannot satisfy the "egregious injustice" exception, the court is necessarily invoking a constitutional prerogative to define the scope of such an exception. This is not restraint. It is an effective assumption of power—an assumption in a black box without any indication of its basis in law.
 [*P45]  I concede the need for briefing addressed more explicitly to the question of the constitutional source of our authority to recognize  an exception to the PCRA's time-bar provisions. For that reason I would have entered an order calling for such briefing in this case. My colleagues obviously saw the matter differently, preferring instead to postpone such briefing and analysis for a future case.2  That is their prerogative. But having made that decision, the court is in no position to avoid grappling with this question on the ground that it was inadequately briefed.
 [*P46]  To resolve the matters before us on the basis of law, we must address forthrightly the scope of our constitutional authority, if any, to invoke exceptions to the PCRA. It makes no legal sense to refuse to do so. And logically we cannot decide this case on a middle ground of "restraint" without effectively deciding the key constitutional question.
 [*P47]  I write separately to express my disagreement with the court's methodology and to identify the grounds on which I would affirm the district court. First, I would reject Winward's "egregious injustice" argument on the ground that we lack the power to perpetuate a repealed statutory standard or to engage in common-law regulation in a field occupied extensively by a statute. Second, I would clarify that any basis for an "egregious injustice" exception must be located in a provision of the constitution. Finally, I would find that there is no constitutional ground for any such exception, and would affirm on that basis.
I
 [*P48]  The 2008 amendments to the PCRA prescribe the "sole remedy" for post-conviction review of a conviction or sentence, "replac[ing] all prior remedies for review, including extraordinary or common law writs." Utah Code § 78B-9-102(1) (2008). In so doing, these amendments also repealed a preexisting statutory exception to the PCRA's time bar—one that allowed courts, in the "interests of justice," to "excuse a petitioner's failure to file" a petition within the timeframe prescribed by statute. Utah Code § 78-35a-107(3) (1996).
 [*P49]  In Peterson v. Kennard, we acknowledged that these amendments "appear[] to have extinguished our common law writ authority." 2008 UT 90, ¶ 16 n.8, 201 P.3d 956. Yet we have never definitively disclaimed any lingering judicial power to recognize an extra-statutory exception to the time bar imposed by the PCRA. It is time to do so now. No such power can persist in the face of a constitutional exercise of legislative power to regulate the process of post-conviction review. If the PCRA's time bar is constitutional (as I believe it is for reasons explained below), our judicial power is constrained to the interpretation and application of the statute. We have no common-law power to regulate in the face of a comprehensive statute, and certainly no authority to revive repealed legislation.
 [*P50]  That conclusion is not at all undermined by the fact that the post-conviction habeas right is protected by the constitution. Constitutionally guaranteed rights are not impervious to regulation.3  And as we have recently emphasized, the power to regulate constitutional claims unquestionably encompasses the right to subject them to time bars. See Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v. Horne, 2012 UT 66, ¶ 52, 289 P.3d 502 (holding that even constitutional claims can be time-barred).4  That proposition is well settled. It is universally understood that the legislature may impose reasonable limitations on the assertion of federal constitutional rights. See Michel v. Louisiana, 350 U.S. 91, 97, 76 S. Ct. 158, 100 L. Ed. 83 (1955); see also Horne, 2012 UT 66, ¶ 52. The same goes for rights rooted in our state constitution. See Bott v. DeLand, 922 P.2d 732, 743 (Utah 1996) (stating that rights granted to citizens under the Utah Constitution "are subject to reasonable regulation"), abrogated on other grounds by Spackman ex rel. Spackman v. Bd. of Educ., 2000 UT 87, 16 P.3d 533.5 
 [*P51]  That said, the legislative power to regulate the assertion of constitutional rights is not unlimited. But the limits are defined by the constitution itself. The question, then, is whether the legislature's regulation of rights guaranteed by the constitution somehow runs afoul of a constitutional standard.6  See Utah Sch. Bds. Ass'n v. Utah State Bd. of Educ., 2001 UT 2, ¶ 11, 17 P.3d 1125 (reiterating that the plenary legislative power is "subject only to the limitations or prohibitions imposed by the state constitution" (internal quotation marks omitted)).
II
 [*P52]  Our authority to override the PCRA's time-bar provisions with an "exception" of our own making is accordingly limited. We possess that power only if it is mandated by the constitution—or, in other words, if the PCRA's time bar is itself unconstitutional. I see no way to decide this case as presented without addressing the threshold question of the source of our power (if any) to promulgate exceptions like the "egregious injustice" standard proffered by Winward. In applying an exception invoked arguendo, the court is certainly not "avoiding" this question, see supra ¶ 18, in any meaningful sense. It is instead resolving a key question sub silentio and without any analysis.
 [*P53]  The majority's approach here mirrors that in Gardner v. State, 2010 UT 46, ¶¶ 93-97, 234 P.3d 1115, where the court rejected an "egregious injustice" ground for excusing a time bar under the PCRA by concluding that the petitioner had failed to establish that "any such exception would apply to him" even if it was viable. Supra ¶ 15 (citing Gardner, 2010 UT 46, ¶ 93, 234 P.3d 1115). Following Gardner, the "egregious injustice" exception (or "threshold test," as the court now puts it7  is deemed to require the petitioner to "persuade the court that, given the combined weight of the meritoriousness of the petitioner's claim and the justifications for raising it late, the court should consider recognizing an exception to the PCRA's procedural rules." Supra ¶ 20 (internal quotation marks omitted). That exception, however, is nothing more or less than the statutory "interest of justice" exception to the PCRA set forth in Adams v. State, 2005 UT 62, 123 P.3d 400,  which in turn was based on a now-defunct version of the PCRA, Utah Code § 78-35a-107(3) (2002).
 [*P54]  The majority has hardly avoided the question of the basis for our authority to prescribe exceptions to the PCRA. It has decided that question for the purpose of resolving this case, and has done so by reviving the language of a provision repealed by our legislature. I see no way to justify that as an act of judicial restraint. It seems to me to be quite the opposite. And the application of the repealed statutory provision is in no way an act of avoidance. We cannot logically assert that a petitioner who fails to satisfy the repealed statutory standard "certainly cannot qualify" under an undefined "egregious injustice" exception. See supra ¶ 20 n.5. That is true if and only if the latter standard is more rigorous than that repealed by the legislature. But we have no way to know that unless and until we say what we mean by "egregious injustice"—which of course we cannot do without identifying its legal basis (in the constitution or elsewhere).
 [*P55]  Thus, the court has not stopped short of defining the nature and scope of the "egregious injustice" exception so much as it has done so sub rosa. Such a move is troubling.8  We are oath bound to decide cases in accordance with the law. That oath subsumes a duty to identify the law that governs our decisions. And the failure to do that leaves us open to the criticism that other factors may be guiding our decisionmaking.9  That possibility mandates an analysis of the legal basis of an "egregious injustice" exception before we apply it.
 [*P56]  If we are to apply that exception, we must start with an analysis of any basis for it in the constitution. For this reason, Winward preserved a very narrow constitutional challenge by arguing that an "egregious injustice" exception exists and should be applied to him. My analysis of that question yields a straightforward answer: We have no constitsutional authority to prescribe an extra-statutory "egregious injustice" exception of any sort, as the PCRA's time-bar provisions fall comfortably within the ample authority the legislature retains to regulate post-conviction relief.
III
 [*P57]  Under the Utah Constitution, the domain of the legislative and judicial authority over post-conviction review is defined by the Suspension Clause.10  This provision states  that "[t]he privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless, in case of rebellion or invasion, the public safety requires it." Utah Const. art. I, § 5. That limitation leaves room for the legislature to implement processes and procedures that confine and define habeas review so long as they stop short of a "suspension" of the writ.
 [*P58]  Our judicial authority in this field is defined by this same principle. We may invoke exceptions to the regulatory terms of the PCRA if—and only to the extent that—the statute effectively "suspends" the writ of habeas corpus. In that event the PCRA would be unconstitutional, and we would have the authority and the responsibility to identify its unconstitutionality and remedy it by striking down any offending provisions.
 [*P59]  I find no plausible basis in the Suspension Clause for striking down the PCRA's time bar—or, conversely, for invoking authority for a judicial exception (for "egregious injustice" or otherwise) to it.11  The courts considering the constitutionality of time bars like the PCRA's have uniformly upheld them against Suspension Clause challenges.12  In so doing, they have recognized that "[a]ny legal system, including habeas corpus, requires procedures to implement it. . . . [S]o long as those procedures are reasonable for persons who seek redress[,] they do not offend the state constitutional ban on suspending habeas corpus." Bartz v. State, 314 Ore. 353, 839 P.2d 217, 224 (Ore. 1992).
 [*P60]  Thus, PCRA-like post-conviction procedures are uniformly upheld as constitutional because they are "a reasonable substitute for the writ,"id. do not "materially impair[]" the habeas right, Davis v. State, 443 N.W.2d 707, 709 (Iowa 1989), or are neither "inadequate nor ineffective," Swain v. Pressley, 430 U.S. 372, 381, 97 S. Ct. 1224, 51 L. Ed. 2d 411 (1977).13  Across the board, courts uphold these time bars because they give petitioners a meaningful opportunity to contest their confinement. See Baker v. Grams, No. 10-C-412, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124913, 2010 WL 4806992, at *3 (E.D. Wis. Nov. 22, 2010) ("[C]ourts have . . . unanimously upheld the constitutionality of [the PCRA's federal analogue's one-year] limitations period.").
 [*P61]  Implicit in these holdings is an important premise regarding the scope of the underlying constitutional right of habeas review. The reasonableness or adequacy of any replacement statutory scheme necessarily depends on the character of the right the original remedy protected. So, some courts  require the post-conviction remedy replacing the writ to be a reasonable substitute for the habeas right as it was traditionally or historically understood.14  And, historically, the habeas writ typically was available only to contest a sentence or conviction imposed by a court lacking adequate jurisdiction. See, e.g., In re Runyan, 121 Wn.2d 432, 853 P.2d 424, 430 (Wash. 1993). Indeed, this was the understanding of the writ when our own constitution was enacted. See Ex parte Hays, 15 Utah 77, 47 P. 612, 614 (Utah 1897). In one of this court's earliest habeas opinions, we explained that "[w]here a case has been tried in a district court, and the judgment rendered at the trial has been affirmed by the supreme court, such trial and judgment will be presumed to be legal, and cannot be questioned upon habeas corpus for anything except a want of jurisdiction." Id.15  For states recognizing this narrow view, then, post-conviction relief procedures are a reasonable substitute as long as they preserve the "core" of the habeas right: a petitioner's ability to contest the sentencing/convicting court's jurisdiction over his person and over the subject matter of the case.
 [*P62]  Other courts have defined the habeas right as encompassing broader contests to executive confinement. See, e.g., Wiglesworth v. Wyrick, 531 S.W.2d 713, 717 (Mo. 1976) (en banc). According to the Missouri Supreme Court, for example, "the suspension prohibited relates to denial of the substantive right to have judicial inquiry into the cause of and justification for allegedly illegal detention." Id.; see State v. Towery, 143 Ala. 48, 39 So. 309, 309 (Ala. 1905) ("The 'suspension' of the writ which is prohibited means the denial to the citizen of the right to demand an investigation into the cause of his detention."). For these courts, habeas is not suspended as long as its replacement leaves petitioners with some reasonable opportunity to have their claims heard on the merits. See Lucidore v. N.Y. State Div. of Parole, 209 F.3d 107, 113 (2d Cir. 2000).
 [*P63]  Ultimately, we need not commit ourselves to either conception of the core habeas right—the narrow jurisdictional inquiry or the broader merits-based one—because the PCRA's procedural requirements appear to be a reasonable substitute under either formulation. Petitioners have ample time before the statute of limitations runs to contest either the court's jurisdiction over them or to begin the process of having their claims heard on the merits. See Brooks v. Olivarez, No. C 98-134 MJJ (PR), 1998 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 12239, 1998 WL 474160, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 5, 1998) ("That one year gives the [petitioner] plenty of time to get to [the] court and leaves room for the inevitable delays in mail, unpredictable lockdowns, as well as interruptions in research and writing time common in prison."). The one-year time bar does not foreclose inquiry into illegal detention or circumscribe it unreasonably. It imposes rational and reasonable processes to make these inquiries manageable and speedy.
 [*P64]  I would thus conclude that the PCRA's time bar survives scrutiny under the Suspension Clause. And because our power to override statutes is defined by the extent of its unconstitutionality, I would find that the PCRA stands intact as enacted—and without judicial amendment under an "egregious injustice" exception.
IV
 [*P65]  Although I agree with the result the court reaches, I cannot endorse the majority's  approach. It perpetuates the uncertainty created in Gardner and fosters, without deciding, the notion that this court wields some ephemeral power residing between the explicit lines of our constitutional authority. We have no such power. I would decide this case on grounds that clarify that fundamental point.

 

