, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
I concur in the judgment but do not join all of the court's rationale.
In an effort to execute their judgment against Vertical LLC on assets owned by Kathleen Reuter, the creditors make a two-step argument. First, the creditors contend that the court should pierce Vertical's veil to reach the assets of a tortfeasor partnership that was formed by Nathan Reuter and Daryl Brown. Second, they maintain that Nathan and Kathleen Reuter owned Nathan's share in the tortfeasor partnership as tenants by the entirety, so that Kathleen is liable for the debts of the tortfeasor partnership. The court concludes that the second step fails and does not address the first. I do not join the court's rationale on step two, but conclude that the argument fails at step one.
In Reuter v. Cutcliff (In re Reuter), 686 F.3d 511 (8th Cir. 2012), this court held that it was not clear error for the bankruptcy court to conclude that a tortfeasor partnership existed between Nathan and Brown. Id. at 517. Because Nathan used funds owned jointly with his wife Kathleen to establish and sustain the partnership, the creditors argue in their second step that Nathan's interest in the partnership belonged to Nathan and Kathleen Reuter as tenants by the entirety. Our prior decision did not address who owned the partnership interest that was created by Nathan's involvement with Brown. See Wehrheim v. Brent, 894 S.W.2d 227, 229 (Mo. Ct. App. 1995) ("[A] partnership may be held in a tenancy by the entireties.").
The court here concludes as a matter of law that Nathan alone owned the partnership interest, because there is not "clear, cogent, and convincing evidence" that Nathan and Kathleen owned the interest as tenants by the entirety. This is a debatable application of Missouri law that we should be reluctant to adopt. Missouri courts require clear and convincing evidence to show that a partnership has been "established." Morrison v. Labor & Indus. Relations Comm'n, 23 S.W.3d 902, 907-09 (Mo. Ct. App. 2000). Our prior decision, however, settled that a partnership was established  by Nathan's involvement with Brown.
This appeal concerns a separate dispute about who owns the partnership interest that was identified in our prior decision. As in Werheim, "[w]hile the parties here do not dispute the existence of the partnership, the nature of it is in dispute." 894 S.W.2d at 228. There is no Missouri authority dictating that the district court should decide ownership by a heightened standard of proof rather than by a preponderance of the evidence. And it would be anomalous to do so. If there is not clear and convincing evidence that either Nathan or the Reuter entirety owned the partnership interest, but only a preponderance of the evidence pointing to one or the other, then we would be left with a partnership interest that has no owner. It seems more likely that Missouri would apply the traditional preponderance standard to resolve this dispute. Under that standard, in view of the weak presumption applicable to entirety funds and Nathan's testimony, ante, at 5-6, there is a genuine dispute of material fact about whether the partnership interest is owned by Nathan or the Reuter entirety.
Of course, whoever owns or holds the partnership interest is the party that established a partnership with Brown; § 358.260 of the Missouri revised statutes is not at issue. Cf. ante, at 5 n.5. But our first opinion did not address whether there was clear and convincing evidence that Nathan individually, as opposed to the Reuter entirety, established the partnership. If that question were already resolved, then it would be unnecessary to discuss whether "Nathan's interest in the Tortfeasor Partnership actually belonged to Nathan and Kathleen as tenants by the entirety," ante, at 5; a simple citation to the prior decision would suffice. By now suggesting that no partnership could be formed unless there was clear and convincing evidence that Nathan individually established it, or clear and convincing evidence that the Reuter entirety established it, the majority unfortunately calls into question whether there was a partnership at all.
But even assuming that the Reuter entirety owned an interest in the tortfeasor partnership, the creditors must pierce the veil of Vertical LLC to recover from Kathleen. The ordinary grounds to pierce a veil in Missouri are that the entity is either the instrumentality or the alter ego of the defendant. See Fleming Cos. v. Rich, 978 F. Supp. 1281, 1303 (E.D. Mo. 1997) (summarizing Missouri law). The creditors disclaim any reliance on an "alter ego" theory. While they do advance what they call an "instrumentality" theory, they do not argue that the facts here meet the three-part instrumentality test under Missouri law. See id.
The creditors rely instead on dicta in Saxton v. St. Louis Stair Co., 410 S.W.2d 369 (Mo. Ct. App. 1966), where the state court of appeals considered a workers compensation claim. The issue was whether a man who claimed workers compensation benefits was an employee of the company in whose manufacturing plant he was injured. The claimant asserted that he was an employee; the company countered that he was a "partner" in the business.
In analyzing the dispute, the court said "[i]t is possible for parties to have followed such a course of conduct that it becomes apparent that they intended to carry on as partners because their arrangement of the affairs of the particular enterprise was such as to indicate that they operated by mutual agreement outside the confines of corporation law." Id. at 376. In that situation, the court opined, "the time has arrived to pierce the corporate veil"—meaning, in Saxton, that the claimant could be  treated as a partner in the company despite his assertion that he was an employee in service of a corporation. The court in Saxton ultimately held, however, that the claimant was in the controllable service of a corporation, and was thus an employee.
Saxton was a workers compensation case, not a dispute about imposing individual liability on persons who compose a corporate entity. Since 1966, no Missouri court has invoked dicta from Saxton to pierce a corporate veil and reach the assets of a shareholder or member without a showing that an entity was either an instrumentality or an alter ego of an individual who composed it. As the creditors do not argue that Vertical LLC was an alter ego or a true "instrumentality" of the tortfeasor partnership, I conclude that the creditors have not established grounds to pierce the veil of the LLC under Missouri law. I also agree with the court's rejection of the creditors' alternative theory that Nathan fraudulently transferred his settlor's interest to Kathleen. Ante, at 7-8. I therefore concur in the judgment.

 

