, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act does not expressly preempt South Dakota's use tax on purchases of non-gaming amenities at the Royal River Casino & Hotel by those who are not members of the Flandreau Santee Sioux Tribe. On this much, I agree with the court. The court proceeds, however, to affirm the district court's preemption ruling on an alternative ground—namely, that "the State's interests in imposing the tax" do not "outweigh the relevant federal and Tribal interests." I conclude that federal law does not preempt the South Dakota use tax on the purchase of non-gaming amenities by nonmembers, so I would reverse the judgment.
The Supreme Court last addressed the subject of state taxation of nonmembers for activity on an Indian reservation thirty years ago. The Court explained that "questions of pre-emption in this area are not resolved by reference to standards of pre-emption that have developed in other areas of the law." Cotton Petroleum Corp. v. New Mexico, 490 U.S. 163, 176, 109 S. Ct. 1698, 104 L. Ed. 2d 209 (1989). What governs instead is "a flexible preemption analysis sensitive to the particular facts and legislation involved." Id.
The court here concludes that South Dakota's use tax on nonmember purchases of amenities is preempted because the case is analogous to White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 448 U.S. 136, 100 S. Ct. 2578, 65 L. Ed. 2d 665 (1980), and Ramah Navajo School Board, Inc. v. Bureau of Revenue of New Mexico, 458 U.S. 832, 102 S. Ct. 3394, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1174 (1982). Those decisions held that particular state taxes on nonmember activities undertaken on tribal land were preempted. The analogy to this case, however, is wanting.
Bracker involved a motor carrier license tax and use fuel tax that a State applied to a non-Indian logging company that operated on an Indian reservation. The Tribe had agreed to reimburse the company for any tax incurred as a result of its on-reservation business activity, so it was "undisputed that the economic burden of the asserted taxes [would] ultimately fall on the Tribe." 448 U.S. at 151. The Supreme Court held that the state taxes were preempted. The opinion cited a "pervasive" and "comprehensive" federal regulatory scheme governing tribal timber that left "no room for these taxes," as well as a failure of the State to "identify any regulatory function or service performed by the State that would justify the assessment  of taxes." Id. at 148-49.
Ramah concerned a state tax imposed on gross receipts that a non-Indian construction company received from a tribal school board for the construction of a school on the reservation. Under standard industry practice, the school board reimbursed the construction company for all taxes due, so the ultimate burden of the gross receipts tax fell on the tribal organization. 458 U.S. at 835, 844. The Supreme Court found the case indistinguishable from Bracker and declared the state tax preempted. The Court cited a "detailed regulatory scheme governing the construction of autonomous Indian educational facilities [that was] at least as comprehensive as" the scheme governing timber in Bracker, id. at 841, and emphasized that the State did "not seek to assess its tax in return for the governmental functions it provides to those who must bear the burden of paying [the] tax." Id. at 843.
The Court's next decision, however, cabined Bracker and Ramah. Cotton Petroleum considered a state severance tax on the production of oil and gas by non-Indian lessees of wells located on a reservation. In urging federal preemption of the state tax, the Tribe cited the Indian Mineral Leasing Act of 1938 and a congressional purpose to provide tribes with a profitable source of revenue from oil and gas leases. But the Court refused to find preemption of state taxation based on the indirect burdens that the state taxes imposed on this broad congressional purpose. Without "some special factor such as those present" in Bracker and Ramah, the indirect burdens were insufficient to justify invalidating the state taxes. 490 U.S. at 187. The Court expressed concern that a preemption ruling would mean a return to the "thoroughly repudiated doctrine" of intergovernmental tax immunity. Id.
In distinguishing Bracker and Ramah, the Court in Cotton Petroleum highlighted that the prior cases both "involved complete abdication or noninvolvement of the State in the on-reservation activity." Id. at 185. Bracker and Ramah also involved "exclusive" federal and tribal regulation of the nonmember activity, whereas the federal and tribal regulations in Cotton Petroleum were "extensive," but not "exclusive." Id. at 186. And Cotton Petroleum did not involve "an unusually large state tax" that "imposed a substantial burden on the Tribe." Id.
The situation here does not share the "special" characteristics that led the Court to find preemption in Bracker and Ramah. This is not a case of "complete abdication or noninvolvement of the State in the on-reservation activity." The State provides a range of services for the Casino: law enforcement operations, R. Doc. 80-7, at 34; R. Doc. 119-11, at 7-13; R. Doc. 125-23, at 4-5; roads that facilitate the Casino's fifty-mile shuttle service for patrons, R. Doc. 80-7, at 16, 21, 28-29; R. Doc. 119-15, at 50; job training for a Casino employee from the State's Department of Human Services, R. Doc. 81-14, at 3-5; and inspection of Casino equipment by the State Fire Marshal, R. Doc. 119-21, at 7-8. Nor is federal and tribal regulation of the amenities "exclusive." The State issues an alcohol license to the Casino and regulates the service of alcoholic beverages, R. Doc. 32, at 14 (¶ 56); R. Doc. 80-10, at 13-14; the State's Department of Health licenses vendors who sell food products to the Casino, R. Doc. 80-10, at 4, 15-16; R. Doc. 82-4, at 4-6; and the Tribe purchases water from the City of Flandreau, whose water system operators are certified by the State's Department of Environment and Natural Resources, R. Doc. 80-2, at 8-9; R. Doc. 132-21, at 5-7. Although the state tax revenue derived from the sales of amenities would not equal the cost of the state services  provided on the reservation, "[n]either Bracker, nor Ramah . . . imposes such a proportionality requirement on the States." Cotton Petroleum, 490 U.S. at 185.
Bracker and Ramah emphasized the existence of a comprehensive federal regulatory scheme of the activity taxed—logging operations and the construction of Indian schools, respectively. The Bureau of Indian Affairs exercised authority over the details of logging operations and school construction, and thereby placed administrative and economic burdens on both the Tribes and the non-Indian companies enlisted to help with the regulated activities. The federal regulation was so pervasive as to preclude an additional burden that state taxes would impose. Here, the absence of a comprehensive federal regulatory scheme that encompasses the provision of non-gaming amenities distinguishes Bracker and Ramah and leaves room for the State to apply its use tax.
The court concludes that the potential negative impact of the state tax on the Tribe's finances is sufficient reason to declare the state tax preempted. Even if gaming is not reduced, the court believes, a reduction in tribal revenues from sales of non-gaming amenities would be contrary to the "broad policies" of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act. To my eye, that submission is akin to the argument rejected in Cotton Petroleum, where the Court declined to accept that "[a]ny adverse effect on the Tribe's finances caused by the taxation of a private party contracting with the Tribe would be ground to strike the state tax." Id. at 187. Even though it was "reasonable to infer that the [state] taxes have at least a marginal effect on the demand for on-reservation leases, the value to the Tribe of those leases, and the ability of the Tribe to increase its tax rate," those indirect effects on a "broad" congressional purpose were insufficient to strike the state taxes without "more explicit guidance from Congress." Id. at 186-87. So too here. As in Cotton Petroleum, the "primary burden of the state taxation falls on the non-Indian taxpayers," id. at 187 n.18, and the indirect effects of state taxation on tribal finances do not justify a finding of preemption.
For these reasons, I would reverse the judgment of the district court declaring preemption of the state use tax on non-gaming amenities. I concur in the court's reversal of the district court's judgment concerning the State's authority to condition renewal of the Tribe's alcoholic beverage license on the Tribe's remittance of use taxes that it was required to collect.

 

