, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
According to the Union, "[t]his case turns on four words: the parties' agreement to arbitrate pension disputes over 'agreed-upon benefit levels.'" Appellant's Br. 9. The company, Trane U.S., agrees: "The Union correctly states that this case turns on four words: 'agreed-upon benefit levels.'" Appellee's Br. 21. The court, however, declines to resolve the issue decided by the district court and presented by the parties. The opinion instead advances interpretations and applications of agreements that were not argued by the parties or addressed by the district court. On the view that "appellate courts do not sit as self-directed boards of legal inquiry and research, but essentially as arbiters of legal questions presented and argued by the parties before them," Carducci v. Regan, 714 F.2d 171, 177, 230 U.S. App. D.C. 80 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (Scalia, J.), I would decide the question presented and affirm the order and judgment of the district court.
The Union brought this action to compel arbitration over two grievances with the company. The collective bargaining agreement between the parties provides in Article XIV, § 2(b), that "no arbitrator shall have any authority in questions . . . involving the establishment, administration, interpretation or application of any Company pension plan or insurance plan, except for agreed-upon benefit levels." The district court concluded that both grievances involve the "application" of a company pension plan. R. Doc. 29, at 5. The parties do not dispute this conclusion on appeal, and neither does the court in so many words. (The court says only that the first grievance does not involve "interpretation" of a pension plan.) Rather, the parties accept that the grievances involve "application" or "administration" of the pension plan, and join issue on whether the disputes concern "agreed-upon benefit levels" such that they are subject to arbitration.
The district court ruled that the grievances do not involve "agreed-upon benefit levels" within the meaning of this agreement. Both grievances concern whether employees are eligible to receive certain benefits—an early retirement supplement or subsidized early retirement payments based on an extra year of service credit after a plant closure. The district court reasoned that in benefits plan administration, an administrator generally must make only two determinations: whether a claimant is eligible for a benefit and, if so, in what amount. The court rejected the Union's position that the two eligibility disputes in this case involved "agreed-upon benefit levels," because it "would encompass the entirety of plan administration and allow the reservation to swallow the exclusion." R. Doc. 29, at 5.
The district court arrived at the better reading of the disputed provision. A "benefit level" is different from a "benefit right." The term "level" is narrower and more specific; one court aptly observed that "it is hard to construe a 'level' as anything other than a particular monetary benefit supplied by the Company." Kennametal Inc. v. United Steelworkers, 262 F. Supp. 2d 663, 669 (W.D. Va. 2003). "Benefit levels" does not include the discrete question of eligibility for a benefit in the first place.
The two grievances at issue in this case concern eligibility for benefits. They address whether and, if so, when certain employees are eligible to receive a benefit under the pension plan. They do not concern particular amounts or "levels" of benefits provided to eligible employees under the early retirement provisions of the pension plan. As such, the grievances do not involve a claim about "agreed-upon benefit levels," and they are not subject to arbitration  under Article XIV, § 2(b) of the collective bargaining agreement.
The court's decision to venture beyond the issue decided in the district court and presented by the parties on appeal unnecessarily raises the potential for error or unintended consequences. Proceeding without the "assistance of counsel which the system assumes," Carducci, 714 F.2d at 177—that is, without briefing and argument on the questions decided—not only raises questions about "altering the character of our institution," id., but also "entails the risk of an improvident or ill-advised opinion on the legal issues tendered." McBride v. Merrell Dow & Pharm., Inc., 800 F.2d 1208, 1211, 255 U.S. App. D.C. 183 (D.C. Cir. 1986). The court's authority to "look past the labels the parties attach to their claims . . . and determine whether they fall within the scope of the arbitration clause," 3M Co. v. Amtex Sec., Inc., 542 F.3d 1193, 1199 (8th Cir. 2008), is not a general license to raise arguments not advanced by the parties in arbitration cases. It is a more modest duty to consider whether the substance of a plaintiff's claims, however labeled, falls within the scope of an arbitration clause when the defendant so argues. Id. at 1198-99 (accepting 3M's argument that the "arbitration clause is broad, . . . and that all of Amtex's claims come with the scope of Article 4D").
On the first grievance in this case, the court reverses the district court based on an application of Article XIV of the collective bargaining agreement that the Union did not seek. The court applies the general arbitration provision of Article XIV, § 1, and apparently rejects sub silentio the parties' agreement that these grievances involve application or administration of the pension plan, and are thus excluded from arbitration under the more specific provision of Article XIV, § 2(b)—unless they involve "agreed-upon benefit levels." On the second grievance, the court affirms the refusal to compel arbitration, but goes beyond the company's position by declaring that Paragraph 5 of the Pension and Insurance Agreement precludes arbitration of claims involving administration of the pension plan, without regard to whether the claims involve "agreed-upon benefit levels." Although neither party sought these determinations, the contractual relationship is now governed by the rulings.
Even if the parties might have overlooked or eschewed promising arguments in favor of their positions, there is no good cause for the court to raise new issues in this case. The ultimate question is only whether the Union is entitled to compel arbitration of two particular grievances. Arbitration is strictly a matter of contract. No statute or common law rule by itself requires that these grievances be arbitrated. "Parties can waive their contractual right to arbitration even if their agreement to arbitrate is valid and enforceable." Schultz v. Verizon Wireless Servs., LLC, 833 F.3d 975, 978 (8th Cir. 2016). A decision resolving the question presented—whether these grievances involve "agreed-upon benefit levels" within the meaning of this agreement—would not foreclose either party from advancing a different ground for arbitration in future proceedings. But a decision rendered sua sponte about other complex contractual provisions fixes the meaning of the agreements without input from the parties, and perhaps even contrary to the parties' shared understanding of their own agreements. I would limit our consideration to the question presented and affirm the judgment.

 

