, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Officer Hawkins unquestionably had probable cause to search appellee Robinson's person for contraband at the time of her arrest. Indeed, Robinson admitted before the search that she had concealed drugs inside the front of her waistband before the arrest. Yet without identifying any decision of the Supreme Court or this court holding unreasonable the scope and manner of a search of a suspect's person for contraband, the court holds that Hawkins violated a clearly established right of Robinson's under the Fourth Amendment. Proper application of the doctrine of qualified immunity calls for a contrary conclusion, so I would reverse the district court's order on Robinson's unreasonable search claim.
During the disputed search, Hawkins wore sanitary rubber gloves on her hands. The search took place in a parking lot behind a tractor-trailer and out of public view. The only third party who witnessed the search was a male police officer at an alleged distance of twenty feet. R. Doc. 55-1, at 45. Robinson asserts that Hawkins called her "Bitch" and a "f***ing dope fiend" before the search. Id. at 39. During the search for contraband, Hawkins allegedly pulled down Robinson's pants and touched her vagina, inside her vaginal lips, and the area below her anus. R. Doc. 68-2, at 22. Robinson also asserts that Hawkins used unreasonable force in conducting the search, but this court properly concludes that allegedly shoving Robinson against the tractor-trailer did not violate a clearly established right.
The first significant problem with the court's qualified-immunity analysis is that it relies on dicta rather than holdings of the Supreme Court or this court. Clearly established law must be derived from holdings, not from dicta. See Morrow v. Meachum, 917 F.3d 870, 875-76 (5th Cir. 2019) (collecting authorities). To support its ruling that Hawkins's conduct violated a clearly established right, the court relies almost entirely on a decision of this court holding that a search did not violate clearly established rights. See Richmond v. City of Brooklyn Center, 490 F.3d 1002, 1008  (8th Cir. 2007). The court cites dicta from Richmond as the source of "clearly established law." Yet Richmond could not place the Fourth Amendment issue beyond debate, because the decision did not even hold that the search in that case was unconstitutional. Id. at 1007 & n.4.
The second major difficulty is that the dicta from Richmond—even assuming that they could clearly establish a constitutional right—do not address the particular circumstances of this case. In considering a defense of qualified immunity, the law must not be examined at a high level of generality: "The dispositive question is whether the violative nature of particular conduct is clearly established." Mullenix v. Luna, 136 S. Ct. 305, 308, 193 L. Ed. 2d 255 (2015) (per curiam) (internal quotation omitted). "[S]pecificity is especially important in the Fourth Amendment context, where the Court has recognized that it is sometimes difficult for an officer to determine how the relevant legal doctrine . . . will apply to the factual situation the officer confronts." Kisela v. Hughes, 138 S. Ct. 1148, 1152, 200 L. Ed. 2d 449 (2018) (per curiam) (first alteration in original) (internal quotation omitted).
The discussion from Richmond does not address facts comparable to those presented here. The decision could not place the constitutionality of Hawkins's search "beyond debate," such that only a "plainly incompetent" officer or a knowing lawbreaker could have conducted the search. See id. (internal quotation omitted). The court's other principal authority, United States v. Williams, 477 F.3d 974 (8th Cir. 2007), highlights the fact-intensive nature of the reasonableness inquiry in this context. Williams expressly declined "to adopt a bright-line rule that when a detainee ha[s] been secured, and travel to a station-house [is] possible, an on-street intimate inspection [is] an unconstitutional, unreasonable search." Id. at 977 (alterations in original) (internal quotation omitted).
The court first cites a statement from Richmond that "strip searches should be conducted in an area as removed from public view as possible without compromising legitimate security concerns." 490 F.3d at 1008. The principal authority cited in Richmond, however, was a decision holding that a visual body cavity search of inmates conducted within view of four to five other inmates was reasonable. See Franklin v. Lockhart, 883 F.2d 654, 655-57 (8th Cir. 1989). The only cited authority that found a constitutional violation was far afield from the facts of this case: the Tenth Circuit held unreasonable a strip search of an arrestee conducted in a police station's public lobby area where "ten to twelve people were milling about." Hill v. Bogans, 735 F.2d 391, 393-94 (10th Cir. 1984). Here, the district court correctly deemed it undisputed that Hawkins conducted the search in an area "that shielded [Robinson] from public view." R. Doc. 84, at 14.
The only witness to Hawkins's search of Robinson was a male police officer. Under Robinson's version of the facts, he was present at a distance of twenty feet. The relevant precedents gave no fair warning that this court would hold the manner of searching unconstitutional based on the male officer's observations. In Timm v. Gunter, 917 F.2d 1093 (8th Cir. 1990), this court held that it was reasonable for female guards to conduct intermittent visual surveillance of male inmates for security purposes while they used showers and bathrooms or slept without clothing. Id. at 1102. We held in Story v. Foote, 782 F.3d 968 (8th Cir. 2015), that officials did not violate a clearly established right under the Fourth Amendment by conducting a body-cavity inspection of a male subject  while a female officer could view the search through a video feed on a security camera. Id. at 971-72. The law thus did not place Hawkins on clear notice that it was unreasonable for a male officer to observe her search of Robinson from a distance in case Hawkins needed assistance. Accord Burton v. Spokane Police Dep't, 383 F. App'x 671, 673 (9th Cir. 2010).
The court next cites dictum from Richmond that a "strip search" should be conducted in a "hygienic fashion." 490 F.3d at 1008. Based on this phrase, the court concludes that Hawkins violated a clearly established right by conducting the search of Robinson in an "unsanitary parking lot" after pushing her against an "oily tractor-trailer" and then pulling her off. See R. Doc. 55-1, at 48. In explaining its reference to hygiene, however, Richmond cited only a decision holding that officers acted unreasonably when they wore a single pair of gloves to conduct body-cavity searches of multiple inmates. Bonitz v. Fair, 804 F.2d 164, 172-73 (1st Cir. 1986). Hawkins did nothing of the sort; she requested a fresh set of sanitary gloves to search Robinson's private areas. There is no evidence that anything unsanitary from the parking lot entered Robinson's body. Richmond's dictum declaring it unreasonable to employ a soiled glove to search a suspect's body cavities did not give fair warning that a search conducted with a sanitary glove would be declared unreasonable based on the condition of the surrounding area.
The court also invokes Richmond's dictum that a "strip search" should not be conducted in a "degrading, humiliating or abusive fashion." 490 F.3d at 1008. To explain this statement, however, Richmond cited a decision holding it unreasonable to subject a prisoner to sexual comments about his anatomy and rub his buttocks with a night stick during strip searches. See Seltzer-Bey v. Delo, 66 F.3d 961, 962-63 (8th Cir. 1995). Richmond also adverted to the Supreme Court's statement in Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S. 520, 99 S. Ct. 1861, 60 L. Ed. 2d 447 (1979), that "on occasion a security guard may conduct the [body-cavity] search in an abusive fashion," and that "[s]uch an abuse cannot be condoned." Id. at 560. The Wolfish Court was referring to a district court's finding that "[t]here have been insultingly suggestive remarks and banal but terrifying expressions of aggressions like those of guards threatening in the time of nakedness to 'put [a] foot up [the] ass' or merely to 'kick the ass' of the humbled prisoner." United States ex rel. Wolfish v. Levi, 439 F. Supp. 114, 147 (S.D.N.Y. 1977).
By contrast, Hawkins's alleged name-calling and use of profanity was not sexually suggestive or particular to the intimate search. Hawkins did not misuse a baton or threaten physical abuse of Robinson's private areas. Hawkins did not have fair warning that she was forbidden to proceed with a search after allegedly uttering the quoted expletives. While the cited language may offend the sensibilities of a reviewing judge in chambers, the court cites no authority holding that use of foul language during the rough-and-tumble of street interaction between officer and suspect renders a subsequent search unreasonable.
Other points raised by the court do not bolster its conclusion. That Robinson had relinquished some marijuana from her underwear did not make it unreasonable for Hawkins to search for more. If anything, confirmation that Robinson hid some drugs under her garments bolstered probable cause to believe that she secreted other contraband inside her clothing or body. That Robinson preferred to be searched at a police station is immaterial. There is no clearly established law that a suspect is entitled to choose the venue for a search  supported by probable cause. The inflammatory statement that Robinson felt like she was "being raped in public" adds nothing to the analysis. As a factual matter, it is undisputed that she was shielded from public view. As a legal matter, the Fourth Amendment reasonableness standard is objective and does not turn the subjective feelings of the person searched.
Rulings declaring the violation of a "clearly established right" require careful attention, because "qualified immunity is important to 'society as a whole,' and because as 'an immunity from suit,' qualified immunity 'is effectively lost if a case is erroneously permitted to go to trial.'" White v. Pauly, 137 S. Ct. 548, 551, 196 L. Ed. 2d 463 (2017) (per curiam) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). For the reasons discussed, the district court's decision denying qualified immunity to Hawkins on Robinson's unreasonable search claim should be reversed. Any disputed facts are not material to the legal conclusion. I concur in Parts II.A and II.B.1 of the opinion of the court and would reverse the district court's order on all three points raised.

 

