, concurring.
In qualified immunity cases like this one, the plaintiff must establish that defendant's alleged conduct violated a clearly established right, and "the clearly established right must be defined with specificity." City of Escondido v. Emmons, 139 S. Ct. 500, 503, 202 L. Ed. 2d 455 (2019). "Use of excessive force is an area of the law in which the result depends  very much on the facts of each case, and thus police officers are entitled to qualified immunity unless existing precedent squarely governs the specific facts at issue." Kisela v. Hughes, 138 S. Ct. 1148, 200 L. Ed. 2d 449 (2018) (per curiam) (internal quotations committed). On plaintiff Rochell's excessive force claim against defendant Ross, the district court acknowledged that there was no case in this circuit with the fact pattern alleged here, but nonetheless denied qualified immunity. Ross understandably objects on appeal that the district court failed to conduct its analysis at the proper level of specificity.
After the briefs were filed in this case, however, a panel of this court decided Wilson v. Lamp, 901 F.3d 981 (8th Cir. 2018). Wilson held not only that pointing a firearm at a compliant suspect was unreasonable, but that the unreasonableness of that conduct was clearly established as of September 2014—more than a year before the incident in this case. The Wilson decision is debatable. Despite the Supreme Court's admonition to ask whether "existing precedent squarely governs the specific facts at issue," Wilson relied on cases involving the use of physical force or violence against compliant subjects to conclude that the unreasonableness of pointing a gun was clearly established. Id. at 990-91.
But given Wilson's definition of what was clearly established law in 2014, I agree that the district court's order denying qualified immunity on the excessive force claim must be affirmed. Under the alleged facts, after all, Ross did not merely point a gun at a compliant Rochell; the claim is that he pressed his firearm behind Rochell's ear and said, "I'll blow your f*****g brains out if you ever approach me like that again." If it violated clearly established law for a defendant in Wilson simply to keep his gun pointed at a compliant subject, then it follows a fortiori that Ross's alleged action did too.
The district court also denied Ross qualified immunity on Rochell's Fourth Amendment claim for false imprisonment, but Ross did not appeal that issue, and this court therefore does not resolve it. Because Ross's stated reason for arresting Rochell was his alleged unlawful possession of a firearm, the district court seemed to believe that Ross could not rely on Rochell's undisputed commission of a disorderly conduct offense to justify arresting and detaining him. R. Doc. 69, at 21-22. Under the Fourth Amendment, however, "an arresting officer's state of mind (except for the facts that he knows) is irrelevant to the existence of probable cause." Devenpeck v. Alford, 543 U.S. 146, 153, 125 S. Ct. 588, 160 L. Ed. 2d 537 (2004); see Carpenter v. Gage, 686 F.3d 644, 649 (8th Cir. 2012) ("That the deputies' subjective reason for arresting Carpenter may have been different does not invalidate the arrest."). This proposition may be considered further as the case proceeds.

 

