, dissenting.
The right to confrontation under the Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant an opportunity for effective cross-examination. But it does not provide a right to compelled discovery of information from a third party that might assist the defendant in cross-examining a witness. The court's ruling that the Confrontation Clause required production of mental health records from witness K.P.'s psychotherapist for use in cross-examining K.P. appears to be unprecedented. In my view, the decision conflicts with the rationale of Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 51-54, 107 S. Ct. 989, 94 L. Ed. 2d 40 (1987) (plurality opinion), and decisions from several circuits. I conclude that the district court's rulings did not infringe on appellant Arias's constitutional right to confrontation, and I would affirm the judgment.
Decisions on the Confrontation Clause "fall into two broad categories: cases involving the admission of out-of-court statements and cases involving restrictions imposed by law or by the trial court on the scope of cross-examination." Delaware v. Fensterer, 474 U.S. 15, 18, 106 S. Ct. 292, 88 L. Ed. 2d 15 (1985) (per curiam). Neither category is implicated here.
The disputed issue concerns K.P.'s testimony that since Arias assaulted her, she had been diagnosed with anxiety and PTSD. The witness testified in open court, so Confrontation Clause cases in the first category involving out of court statements are inapposite. This case also does not fall into the second category: the district court "did not limit the scope or nature of defense counsel's cross-examination in any way." Id. at 19; see Ritchie, 480 U.S. at 53 (plurality opinion).
No ruling of the district court prevented counsel for Arias from questioning K.P. about her PTSD diagnosis. Counsel could have asked for the who, what, when, and where of the diagnosis to explore whether K.P. was credible in reporting it at trial. He could have probed K.P. about her life and mental health history in an effort to discern or suggest other possible causes of PTSD. If K.P. had successfully invoked a psychotherapist-patient privilege to prevent cross-examination, then Arias could have moved to strike her direct testimony about PTSD. See United States v. Singer, 785 F.2d 228, 242 (8th Cir. 1986). The district court expressly offered to consider a different limiting instruction about K.P.'s testimony, but defense counsel did not propose one. That counsel declined to pursue these avenues, of course, does not raise an issue under the Confrontation Clause.
It is not hard, moreover, to imagine sound strategic reasons for defense counsel to forego the questioning. The witness made only one brief mention of PTSD. The district court promptly instructed the jury that psychological symptoms diagnosed after the alleged incident have "extremely limited relevance to you all, if any." The government never mentioned PTSD in final arguments to the jury. Questions from the defense on the topic may well have amplified a fact that was otherwise unmentioned by the prosecution and diminished by the judge's instruction. As the district court observed in discussions with counsel, "a lot of things can happen in one's life that can produce anxiety and PTSD."
The majority concludes, however, that once K.P. testified about the diagnosis, the Confrontation Clause required the district court to compel production of K.P.'s treatment records from her psychotherapist and disclose them to Arias for use in cross-examining K.P. The Supreme Court in Ritchie addressed a similar claim that the Confrontation Clause  entitled a defendant to compelled disclosure of a state agency file. The file included statements made by the defendant's daughter, who was a witness for the prosecution, and the defendant sought to access the file for use in cross-examining her. Only seven Justices voted on the merits, and a four-Justice plurality squarely rejected the defendant's argument under the Confrontation Clause.
Like Arias, the defendant in Ritchie argued that he could not effectively question a witness without the requested state agency file, because "he did not know which types of questions would best expose the weaknesses in her testimony." Id. at 51. The plurality dismissed his argument, saying that it would incorrectly "transform the Confrontation Clause into a constitutionally compelled rule of pretrial discovery." Id. at 52. Because "defense counsel was able to cross-examine all of the trial witnesses fully," id. at 54, the plurality ruled that the failure to compel disclosure of the agency file did not violate the Confrontation Clause. The court's conclusion, ante, at 10, that the district court's refusal to allow the defense access to K.P.'s mental health records was a "limitation on cross-examination" is contrary to Ritchie.
The majority, ante, at 9, seems to believe that the reasoning in Ritchie is limited to a request for pretrial discovery, and that the Confrontation Clause does create a constitutionally compelled rule of in-trial discovery. Ritchie does not support that conclusion. Of course, the defendant in Ritchie wanted the agency file during trial too; that is when he would have used it.
The state supreme court in Ritchie held that the defendant was entitled to pretrial discovery of the agency file, so the Supreme Court addressed that particular ruling, but the plurality's rationale applies equally to a request for compelled discovery during trial. The Ritchie plurality explained that "the right to confrontation is a trial right, designed to prevent improper restrictions on the types of questions that defense counsel may ask during cross-examination." 480 U.S. at 52 (second emphasis added). The opinion thus concluded that "the Confrontation Clause was not violated by the withholding of the [agency] file; it only would have been impermissible for the judge to have prevented Ritchie's lawyer from cross-examining the daughter." Id. at 54 (emphasis added). In light of Ritchie, several circuits—without distinguishing between pretrial and in-trial discovery—have ruled that the Confrontation Clause does not guarantee a right to compelled discovery. United States v. Fattah, 914 F.3d 112, 179 (3d Cir. 2019); United States v. Sardinas, 386 F. App'x 927, 940-41 (11th Cir. 2010); United States v. Hargrove, 382 F. App'x 765, 774-75 (10th Cir. 2010); Isaac v. Grider, No. 98-6376, 2000 U.S. App. LEXIS 9629, 2000 WL 571959, at *6-7 (6th Cir. May 4, 2000); Tapia v. Tansy, 926 F.2d 1554, 1559-60 (10th Cir. 1991); United States v. Tarantino, 846 F.2d 1384, 1415-16, 269 U.S. App. D.C. 398 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (per curiam). The majority's decision creates a stark conflict in the circuits.
The district court's rulings did not violate the Confrontation Clause, and there is thus no reason to remand for an inquiry into whether a purported error was harmless. I concur in the court's rejection of Arias's other contentions in Parts II.A and II.B of the opinion, and I would affirm the judgment.

 

