
I repeat what I said last month: The entrenched, judge-invented qualified immunity regime ought not be immune from thoughtful reappraisal.1 
Qualified immunity strikes an uneasy, cost—benefit balance between two competing deterrence concerns: "the need to hold public officials accountable when they exercise power irresponsibly and the need to shield officials from harassment, distraction, and liability when they perform their duties reasonably."2  By insulating incaution,  the doctrine formalizes a rights—remedies gap through which untold constitutional violations slip unchecked. The real-world functioning of modern immunity practice—essentially "heads government wins, tails plaintiff loses"—leaves many victims violated but not vindicated. More to the point, the "clearly established law" prong, which is outcome-determinative in most cases, makes qualified immunity sometimes seem like unqualified impunity: "letting public officials duck consequences for bad behavior—no matter how palpably unreasonable—as long as they were the first to behave badly."3 
That said, as a middle-management circuit judge, I take direction from the Supreme Court. And the Court's direction on qualified immunity is increasingly unsubtle. We must respect the Court's exacting instructions—even as it is proper, in my judgment, to respectfully voice unease with them.4 
I
Qualified immunity protects "all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law."5  While this bar is not insurmountable, it is sky-high. And it is raised higher when courts leapfrog prong one (deciding whether the challenged behavior violates the Constitution) to reach simpler prong two: no factually analogous precedent. Merely proving unconstitutional misconduct isn't enough. A plaintiff must cite functionally identical authority that puts the unlawfulness "beyond debate" to "every" reasonable officer.6  Last month, for example, the Eleventh Circuit, noting no "materially similar case" (thus no "clearly established law"), granted immunity to a police officer who fired at a family's dog but instead shot a 10-year-old child lying face-down 18 inches from the officer.7  Not only that, the court "expressly [took] no position" as to "whether a constitutional violation occurred in the first place."8  Translation: If the same officer tomorrow shoots the same child while aiming at the same dog, he'd receive the same immunity. Ad infinitum.
The Supreme Court demands precedential specificity. But it's all a bit recursive. There's no earlier similar case declaring a constitutional violation because no earlier plaintiff could find an earlier similar case declaring a constitutional violation. "Section 1983 meets Catch-22. Plaintiffs must produce precedent even as fewer courts are producing precedent. Important constitutional questions go unanswered precisely because no one's answered them before. Courts then rely on that judicial silence to conclude there's no equivalent case on the books. No precedent = no clearly established law = no liability. An Escherian Stairwell."9 
  II
In recent years, individual Justices have raised concerns with the Court's immunity caselaw.10  Even so, the doctrine enjoys resounding, even hardening favor at the Court. Just three months ago, in a case involving the warrantless strip search of a four-year-old preschooler, a strange-bedfellows array of scholars and advocacy groups—perhaps the most ideologically diverse amici ever assembled—implored the Court to push reset.11  To no avail. This much is certain: Qualified immunity, whatever its success at achieving its intended policy goals, thwarts the righting of many constitutional wrongs.
Perhaps the growing left—right consensus urging reform will one day win out. There are several "mend it, don't end it" options. The Court could revisit Pearson12  and nudge courts to address the threshold constitutional merits rather than leave the law undeveloped.13  Even if a particular plaintiff cannot benefit (due to the "clearly established law" prong), this would provide moving-forward guidance as to what the law prescribes and proscribes. Short of that, the Court could require lower courts to explain why they are side-stepping the constitutional merits question.14  Or the Court could confront the widespread inter-circuit confusion on what constitutes "clearly established law."15  One concrete proposal: clarifying the degree of factual similarity required in cases involving split-second decisions versus cases involving less-exigent situations. The Court could also, short of undoing Harlow and reinstating the bad-faith prong, permit plaintiffs to overcome immunity by presenting objective evidence of an official's bad faith.16  Not subjective evidence of bad faith, which Harlow, worried about "peculiarly disruptive" and "broad-ranging discovery," forbids.17  And not unadorned allegations of bad faith. But objective evidence that the official actually realized that he was violating the Constitution.
 Prudent refinements abound. But until then, as Judge Jones explains in today's principal dissent, the Supreme Court's unflinching, increasingly emphatic application of "clearly established law" compels dismissal.
III
I remain convinced that contemporary immunity jurisprudence merits "a refined procedural approach that more smartly—and fairly—serves its intended objectives."18  Yet I also remain convinced that a majority of the Supreme Court disagrees. My misgivings, I believe, are well advised. But we would be ill advised to treat the reform of immunity doctrine as something for this court rather than that Court.19 
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.
JAMES C. HO and ANDREW S. OLDHAM