
Desperate times breed desperate measures. Exhibit A is the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 ("HERA"), enacted after the United States housing bubble burst and triggered a massive mortgage-security and general-credit crisis. Nobody disputes that Congress created the Federal Housing Finance Authority ("FHFA") amid a dire financial calamity. The situation, both domestic and international, was grim and worsening quickly:
• housing market—melting down
• national economy—circling the drain
• global financial system—teetering on collapse
The FHFA was cast as a silver bullet, a super-agency endowed with farreaching regulatory authority to stanch the bleeding and to restore liquidity to the U.S. housing and financial markets.
But contrary to how other federal courts have so far ruled on this issue (including this court's opinion today), Congress did not vest the FHFA with unbounded, unreviewable power. The FHFA—like any agency—is restrained by the four corners of its enabling statute: "An agency literally has no power to act . . . unless and until Congress confers power upon it."1  Every agency requires a defined statutory basis for its actions. Absent a valid delegation of authority, an agency's actions are dubious  at best, and contrary to bedrock constitutional principles at worst. Exigency does not justify conferring nigh-unchecked power on an agency insulated from judicial review. Expedience does not license omnipotence.
This case concerns whether the net worth sweep falls within the scope of the FHFA's statutory authority as conservator. To answer the question before us, we need only look to HERA's plain text. And it is our duty to ensure that the FHFA operates squarely within the bounds of its statutory authority.
Regrettably, the majority opinion does otherwise. The upshot is a lucrative limbo: Mortgage-finance giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are forever trapped in a zombie-like trance as wards of the state, bled of their profits quarter after quarter in perpetuity. In rejecting the Shareholders' statutory claims, the majority opinion embraces the views of our sister circuits, adopting "the same well-reasoned basis common to those courts' opinions."2  But what the majority opinion finds convincing, I find confounding.
With respect I dissent.
 I
In essence, the judicial consensus is that HERA's anti-injunction provision bars the Shareholders claims because (1) the text of HERA does not require the FHFA as conservator to "preserve and conserve" the assets of these colossal government-sponsored enterprises ("GSEs");3  and (2) regardless, the net worth sweep is consistent with the FHFA's statutory authority.4 
Respectfully, this reading, while popular, flouts HERA's plain text, which should be the North Star of our analysis. HERA tells us two important things. First, the anti-injunction provision bars only claims that would "restrain or affect" the FHFA's statutory powers as conservator (not the case here).5  Second, the FHFA does not have unfettered discretion to dispose of the GSEs' assets and property at will so long as it dons the conservator cowl.
By enacting the net worth sweep in the Third Amendment, the FHFA exceeded the scope of its statutory authority as conservator. HERA makes clear that the FHFA may operate either as conservator or receiver at any given time. The statute then provides a list of role-specific duties. As conservator, the FHFA must "preserve and conserve the assets and property" of the GSEs.6  This statutory command is mandatory, not discretionary. Stripping the GSEs of their cash reserves by depriving them of their net worth—in perpetuity—is antithetical to this "preserve and conserve" requirement. This permanent pillaging of capital violates the FHFA's  obligation as conservator to "put the [GSEs] in a sound and solvent condition."7  The sweep siphons the GSEs' net worth quarter after quarter—all but guaranteeing that they will draw on Treasury's funding commitment, increasing its liquidation preference. This action is fundamentally incompatible with the FHFA's statutory mandate as conservator. Indeed, Congress specifically permits the FHFA to perform this action as receiver, yet the FHFA seeks to evade the carefully crafted statutory scheme by proposing an impermissibly broad, and unnecessarily encroaching, view of its powers as conservator. This overstep cannot sidestep judicial review.
According to the majority opinion, however, there is essentially no limit to the FHFA's conservatorship authority, and courts are powerless to intervene so long as the FHFA operates under the guise of "conservator." The majority opinion's conception of conservatorship is foreign to this (or any) court. Adopting this exotic approach betrays the letter and the spirit of limitations provided by HERA, and ultimately allows the FHFA to raze our established principles governing administrative entities.
I cannot endorse such a willy-nilly delegation of authority to an administrative entity impervious to meaningful judicial review. The FHFA's professed power is something special—so spacious it's specious. In terms of unfettered clout, the FHFA has no rival across the federal agency landscape. But unfettered must never be unfretted. Agencies must always operate within the carefully crafted statutory schemes that govern their existence. And while the FHFA's averred authority as conservator is audacious, it is not limitless.
I cannot join the majority opinion's conclusion that the Shareholder's statutory claims are barred by HERA's anti-injunction provision.
 II
Agencies require statutory authorization for their actions. The full extent of FHFA's authority as conservator is thus found within HERA's text.8  As we recently made clear, "the text is the alpha and the omega of the interpretive process."9  So I begin with the language Congress actually used.
Congress created the FHFA to supervise and regulate the GSEs and Federal Home Loan banks.10  HERA granted the FHFA's director discretionary authority to place the GSEs in conservatorship. The statute authorizes the FHFA to "be appointed conservator or receiver for the purpose of reorganizing, rehabilitating, or winding up the affairs of a regulated entity."11  When serving as conservator or receiver, the FHFA enjoys an array of general powers enumerated in § 4617(b)(2). Once appointed as either conservator or receiver, the FHFA succeeds to the "rights, titles, powers, and privileges of the [GSE], and of any stockholder, officer, or director . . . with respect to the [GSE] and the assets of the [GSE]."12  And the FHFA  may assume the assets, business operations, and functions of the GSE, collect money due to the GSE, and "preserve and conserve the assets and property" of the GSE.13  Finally, HERA permits the FHFA to exercise any function of any stockholder, director or officer of the GSE.14 
These general powers, however, must be read in concert with the more specific powers enumerated for conservators and receivers, respectively. Acts of Congress should be read cohesively, contextually, and comprehensively, not "as a series of unrelated and isolated provisions."15  Under our precedent, "it is a 'cardinal rule that a statute is to be read as a whole,' in order not to render portions of [a statute] inconsistent or devoid of meaning."16  The majority opinion's focus on general powers ignores HERA's specific provisions governing how the FHFA is to behave.
Reading the statute holistically, it is clear that HERA outlines two distinct roles—conservator and receiver—that come with distinct powers. And when the FHFA acts as conservator, HERA imposes mandatory duties on the FHFA to "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets and property.
 A
Crucial to the issue before us today is that HERA distinguishes between the role of conservator and the role of receiver. The FHFA Director may designate the agency as either conservator or receiver, but once the FHFA is appointed as one or the other, its powers depend on the role. And HERA prescribes and proscribes those powers.
HERA explicitly provides that the FHFA may "be appointed as conservator or receiver for the purpose of reorganizing, rehabilitating, or winding up the affairs of a regulated entity."17  The statute uses the disjunctive "or," denoting that the FHFA may not act as both conservator and receiver simultaneously.18  Indeed, the text further makes clear that these roles are mutually exclusive—appointing the FHFA as receiver "immediately terminate[s] any conservatorship established for the GSE."19  The roles are distinctive, not cumulative.
So are the powers attaching to each role. Section 4617(b)(2)(D) specifies the FHFA's powers as conservator. The FHFA may take any action "necessary to put the [GSE] in a sound and solvent condition" and "appropriate to carry on the business of the [GSE] and preserve and conserve the [GSE's] assets and property."20  By contrast, § 4617(b)(2)(E), (F) enumerates powers reserved to the FHFA as receiver—which include liquidating the GSE and organizing a "successor enterprise" to operate the GSE.21  Elsewhere, HERA emphasizes the contrasting nature of these powers. In operating the GSEs, the statute permits the FHFA to "perform all functions of the [GSE] in the name of the [GSE] which are consistent with the appointment  as conservator or receiver."22  This language echoes later in the statute. Under the incidental powers provision, the FHFA is empowered only to "exercise all powers and authorities specifically granted to conservators or receivers, respectively, under this section . . . ."23  This use of "respectively" further severs the role of "conservator" from that of "receiver." HERA thus outlines a distinct vision for the FHFA's role as conservator and its role as receiver.
This distinction is not a mere procedural formality. When the FHFA acts as receiver, HERA imposes specific statutory requirements to protect the various rights and interests of creditors and investors.24  These procedures exist to ensure that receivers "fairly adjudicate claims against failed institutions."25  Liquidation is exclusively reserved for the FHFA when it acts as receiver.26  In fact, liquidation is mandatory, leaving no hope to "rehabilitate" a GSE in receivership.27  On the other hand, when the FHFA acts as conservator, it may take any action "necessary to put the [GSE] in a sound and solvent condition" and "appropriate to carry on the business of the [GSE] and preserve and conserve the [GSE's] assets and property."28  These explicit grants of power to the FHFA when it acts as conservator or receiver define the nature of authority in each role. In this light, the FHFA-as-conservator does not have authority to "wind[] up" the GSEs. That is inherently, textually, and exclusively the function of a receiver.
This plain-language interpretation of the FHFA's conservatorship powers follows our interpretation of near-identical language in the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 ("FIRREA"). Congress essentially cut-and-pasted the FHFA's powers and functions as conservator, including the anti-injunction provision, from FIRREA.29  And it is a treasured canon of statutory interpretation that when "Congress adopts a new law incorporating sections of a prior law, Congress normally can be presumed to have had knowledge of the interpretation given to the incorporated law."30  Thus, our interpretation of FIRREA must inform our interpretation of HERA.
FIRREA empowers the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") to act as conservator or receiver.31  FIRREA also breaks down the powers and functions of the FDIC when it acts as conservator or receiver. Once appointed, the FDIC "succeed[s] to . . . all rights, titles, powers, and privileges of the insured depository institution, and of any stockholder, member, accountholder, depositor, officer, or director . . . with respect to the institution and the assets of the institution."32  FIRREA also permits the FDIC to fully assume the assets, business operations, and  functions of the institution, to collect money due to the institution, and to "preserve and conserve the assets and property" of the institution.33  Finally, the FDIC may also exercise any function by any stockholder, director or officer of the institution.34 
This should sound familiar. Much of FIRREA's text and structure mirrors that of HERA. As under HERA, the conservator and receiver roles under FIRREA share common powers and functions, but they are plainly distinct. Among its general powers in operating the regulated entity, the FDIC may "perform all functions of the institution in the name of the institution which are consistent with the appointment as conservator or receiver."35  And, like HERA, FIRREA enumerates specific, unique powers held by conservators36  and by receivers.37  FIRREA authorizes conservators to take "such action as may be . . . necessary to put the insured depository institution in a sound and solvent condition; and . . . appropriate to carry on the business of the institution and preserve and conserve [its] assets."38  In particular, it notes the conservator's "fiduciary duty to minimize the institution's losses,"39  whereas receivers "place the insured depository institution in liquidation and proceed to realize upon the assets of the institution."40  Though the conservator and receiver roles in FIRREA overlap in some respects, the duties reflect different interests and distinct powers.41  Under FIRREA, the FDIC holds distinct roles when it acts as conservator or receiver with clearly delineated statutory bounds between the two roles.
We should read HERA consistently with our previous interpretation of FIRREA. Congress "can be presumed to have had knowledge of the interpretation given to the incorporated law."42  So under HERA's nearly identical language, the FHFA as conservator exercises plainly distinct powers from the FHFA as receiver.
Nevertheless, the FHFA seeks to make bright lines blurry. First, it argues that "winding up is different from liquidation," so a conservator may take steps akin to winding up so long as they fall short of liquidation. Alternatively the FHFA argues that "HERA's plain text authorizes FHFA as 'conservator or receiver' to be appointed 'for the purpose of reorganizing, rehabilitating, or winding up the affairs'" of the GSEs. As a result, the FHFA can "wind up" the GSEs as either conservator or receiver. This argument convinced the D.C. Circuit, which rejected the idea that there is "a rigid boundary" between the FHFA's conservator and receiver roles.43 
To be sure, both as a general matter and as a textual matter, conservators and receivers  share some common functions under HERA. For example, the FHFA, acting as either conservator or receiver, may "transfer or sell any asset or liability" of the GSEs, "without any approval, assignment, or consent."44  In fact, many powers granted to the FHFA are available to it in either role.45 
Winding up the GSEs is not one of those powers. Reading HERA this way would be absurd: It would render the carefully crafted, mandatory, receiver-specific, wind-up procedures irrelevant.46  There are no corresponding procedures for winding up the GSEs during conservatorship.47  This silence is unsurprising. As conservator, the FHFA must "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets. In fact, the powers and functions unique to the FHFA as receiver—winding up and liquidating a GSE—are antithetical to the duties of the FHFA as conservator—rehabilitating a GSE and operating it as a going concern, preserving its assets.48  If the FHFA wished to wind up the GSEs, it must first be designated as receiver.
This conclusion does not deny the FHFA discretion to exercise its lawful powers as conservator; it simply enforces it. The FHFA may not exercise powers reserved for receivers when it is designated as a conservator. HERA specifies discrete conduct that the FHFA may exercise in pursuit of its goals in either role.
All this boils down to the fact that the FHFA cannot hide behind the conservator label to insulate it from meaningful judicial review. The FHFA placed the GSEs into conservatorship. In making that designation, the FHFA is limited to its authority as a conservator under HERA.
 B
Next, we must outline the contours of the FHFA's conservatorship authority. Understanding how HERA defines the FHFA's conservatorship role is essential to determining whether the FHFA exceeded its statutory authority.
HERA enumerates specific powers for the FHFA when it acts as conservator. The FHFA "may . . . take such action as may be . . . necessary to put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition; and . . . appropriate to carry on the business of the regulated entity and preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated entity."49 
These powers accord with the traditional understanding of the role of conservators at common law.50  A conservator is "the modern equivalent of the common-law  guardian" and a "managing conservator" is "[a] person appointed by a court to manage the estate or affairs of someone who is legally incapable of doing so."51  And conservators had specific fiduciary duties: They were appointed to protect the legal interests of those unable to protect themselves.52  According to the Congressional Research Service, "[a] conservator is appointed to operate the institution, conserve its resources, and restore it to viability."53  Traditionally at common law, conservators thus owed certain obligations to their wards—power must be exercised for their benefit.
This common-law understanding forms the foundation on which Congress built FIRREA and later, HERA, authorizing agencies to serve as conservators for an entity by "preserv[ing] and conserv[ing]" its assets and operating it in a "sound and solvent" manner.54  As explained above, we have interpreted FIRREA to "state[] explicitly that a conservator only has the power to take actions necessary to restore a financially troubled institution to solvency."55  We are in good company—the Fourth, Eighth, Ninth, Eleventh, and D.C. Circuits have articulated similar views.56  And the FDIC's own policy statements reflect its view that the conservatorship role imposes a duty to achieve "sufficient tangible capitalization" that reasonably assures "the future viability of the institution."57  Importantly, a conservator must "minimize the institution's losses" and ensure "the future viability of the institution," whereas a receiver liquidates and realizes upon the assets of the institution.
Before this litigation, the FHFA itself agreed with this understanding of its authority as conservator. The FHFA acknowledged publicly that "[t]he purpose of conservatorship is to preserve and conserve  each company's assets and property and to put the companies in a sound and solvent condition."58  The FHFA has repeatedly emphasized that HERA "required" it to restore the GSEs to soundness and to "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets.59  And its own regulations highlight that "the essential function of a conservator is to preserve and conserve the institution's assets," and "[a] conservator's goal is to continue the operations of a regulated entity, rehabilitate it[,] and return it to a safe, sound[,] and solvent condition."60  Neither winding up nor liquidating an entity, whether synonymous or not, are consistent with this mission.
Now, however, the FHFA no longer thinks a conservator must conserve. The FHFA argues that HERA's conservatorship powers "bear no resemblance to the type of conservatorship measures that a private common-law conservator would be able to undertake," and Congress empowered the FHFA to act in its own best interests under the "incidental powers" provision. In essence, the FHFA contends that the incidental powers provision represents a clear, contrary intention by Congress to displace the common-law interpretation of "conservator."
Other circuits have found this argument persuasive. They believe Congress explicitly delegated authority that exceeds the customary meaning of conservator, so the FHFA complied with its general statutory mandate in adopting the net worth sweep.61  First, they conclude that the FHFA is not a traditional conservator because "Congress granted FHFA a broad array of discretionary authority"—by framing HERA in terms of permissive authority, Congress intended the FHFA to exercise its discretion and it is not required to pursue binding duties under § 4617(b)(2)(D) when it acts as conservator.62  Second, they find that the FHFA is  not a traditional conservator because express powers granted by HERA's incidental powers permit the FHFA to take its own interests into account when performing its duties as conservator, conflicting with the customary meaning of conservatorships.63 
There is a textual hook in finding that Congress granted the FHFA discretionary authority. HERA provides that the FHFA "may . . . take such action as may be . . . necessary to put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition; and . . . appropriate to carry on the business of the regulated entity and preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated entity."64  Typically, "may" implies discretion.65  I do not doubt that "may means may" or that "'may is, of course, 'permissive rather than obligatory.'"66  But courts seeking a forthright interpretation should not myopically focus on "may" at the expense of reading HERA as a cohesive, contextual whole. In divining statutory meaning, courts must never divorce text from context.67 
Once again, "[a]n agency literally has no power to act . . . unless and until Congress confers power upon it."68  Here, "may" enables the FHFA to act—the FHFA may take any action as conservator that is either (1) "necessary to put the [GSE] in a sound and solvent condition" or (2) "appropriate to carry on the business of the [GSE] and preserve and conserve" GSE assets and property.69  Logically, the FHFA may not take an action that is inconsistent with this express list of powers.70  Any other reading would render the FHFA's enumeration of specific conservator powers meaningless. Section 4617(b)(2)(D), though framed permissively, thus circumscribes the FHFA's powers as conservator—any action it takes must be consistent with its mission to "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets.
Nor does HERA's incidental powers provision give the FHFA carte blanche to ignore its statutory mandate as conservator. Under its incidental powers, the FHFA may "exercise all powers and authorities specifically granted to conservators or receivers, respectively, under this section, and such incidental powers as shall be necessary" to carry them out.71  And the FHFA may "take any action authorized by this section, which the [FHFA] determines is in the best interests of the [GSE] or the  [FHFA]."72  According to the Shareholders, and at least two other circuits, this provision includes a broad grant of permissive authority for the FHFA to do whatever it pleases based on its own self-interest.73 
I doubt that Congress "in fashioning this intricate . . . machinery, wouldhang one of the main gears on the tail pipe."74  Interpreting the incidental powers provision to include such sweeping authority would treat the incidental powers as ends unto themselves, swallowing the remainder of HERA's statutory text.
The incidental powers provision is not a freestanding source of authority to act. Instead, the provision is confined to "any action authorized by this section."75  In essence, "incidental" powers must be "incidental" to something. To support this reading, we need look no further than a dictionary; "incidental" means "[s]ubordinate to something of greater importance; having a minor role."76  It is inconceivable that FHFA could exercise such free-wheeling authority under its "incidental" powers—wholly untethered from its specific powers as conservator or receiver.
And this broad reading ignores provisions granting the FHFA specific powers and functions as either conservator or receiver. The incidental powers provision references these powers and functions when it authorizes the FHFA to "exercise all powers and authorities specifically granted to conservators or receivers, respectively."77  Logically, any exercise of the FHFA's incidental powers must be in service of a power specifically provided by HERA.78  It is only with reference to these specific powers that we may discern the scope of the FHFA's authority over the GSEs.79 
Regardless, permitting the FHFA to act in its own best interests does not come close to providing the type of explicit instruction required to suggest that Congress displaced the common-law attributes of conservatorships.80  The FHFA possesses  significant regulatory authority with the potential for reverberations throughout the United States economy. Given the importance of the FHFA's role and the potential disruption to financial markets, the incidental powers provision is insufficient to negate the assumption that the settled common-law meaning of conservator applies.81  Instead, the provision merely permits the FHFA to engage in self-dealing transactions, an act otherwise inconsistent with the conservator role.82 
The FHFA's topsy-turvy take on the notion of conservators upends our traditional understanding of fiduciary conservatorships, and I cannot endorse it. "Congress' repetition of a well-established term carries the implication that Congress intended the term to be construed in accordance with pre-existing regulatory interpretations."83  Conservator is one such term. We have consistently honed the meaning of conservator at common law and subsequently under FIRREA. This court should decline to follow FHFA through the looking glass to a world where conservators need not conserve.
Without the statutory command to "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets and property, the FHFA is left without any intelligible principle to guide its discretion as conservator. The FHFA is essentially permitted to take any action—unmoored from any statutory guidance—so long as it could plausibly defend its action as "reorganizing" the GSEs. This broad reading effectively eviscerates the carefully crafted statutory authority granted to the FHFA, permitting it to abandon its conservatorship mission.
In sum, the FHFA "is not empowered to jettison every duty a conservator owes its ward, and it is certainly not entitled to disregard the statute's own clearly defined limits on conservator power."84  The FHFA cannot act contrary to HERA's conservator powers; any such action would not be "incidental" to its statutorily enumerated authority. Thus, the FHFA may act in its own interests as conservator, but its actions must otherwise be consistent with its statutory authority to "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets and operate the GSEs in a "sound and solvent" manner.
 III
Because the FHFA was appointed as conservator—not as receiver—we must consider whether the net worth sweep was consistent with "the duties, purpose, and actions of a prudent conservator."85  The key question is whether the net worth sweep was designed to "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets and rehabilitate the GSEs by putting them in "sound and solvent condition."86 
The FHFA's conservatorship began on a relatively optimistic note. Fannie and Freddie were publicly placed into conservatorship  on September 6, 2008, after failed attempts to recapitalize the GSEs. At the time, the FHFA Director was concerned about the GSEs' ability to "operate safely and soundly," and he explained the conservatorship as "a statutory process designed to stabilize a troubled institution with the objective of returning the entities to normal business operations."87  In pursuit of its conservatorship goals, the FHFA enlisted Treasury to provide cash infusions that preserved the value of Fannie's and Freddie's assets, enhanced their ability to function in the housing market, and mitigated the systemic risk that contributed to an unstable market.88  Per the PSPA, Treasury purchased $1 billion of senior preferred stock in each GSE from the FHFA in exchange for access to capital. Treasury also had a right to a 10% dividend and periodic commitment fee to compensate it for any capital provided to the GSEs. Treasury believed it had a "responsibility to both avert and ultimately address the systemic risk" of GSE debt and to "eliminate any mandatory triggering of receivership."89  This is consistent with its role as conservator—fixing short-term deficits and returning entities to functioning market participants is the essence of conservatorships.
But everything changed under the Third Amendment. The net worth sweep fundamentally altered the PSPA between the FHFA and Treasury, replacing the fixed-rate 10% dividend with the right to sweep the GSEs' entire quarterly net worth after accounting for a $3 billion capital reserve buffer that would gradually fall to zero. Far from ensuring ongoing access to capital, the net worth sweep denied the GSEs access to approximately $130 billion in profit that was instead turned over to Treasury.90  In essence, the sweep siphoned nearly all of the GSEs' net worth between 2012 and the present day directly to a sole shareholder: Treasury. It is undisputed that Treasury has collected over $200 billion under the net worth sweep—well exceeding the $187.5 billion it loaned to the GSEs.91  Treasury has now recovered far more than it invested in the companies between 2008 and 2012 under the PSPAs. Yet the GSEs remain on the hook for the $187.5 billion obtained from Treasury before the Third Amendment. Under the Third Amendment, Treasury has the right to retain the GSEs' net worth in perpetuity.
Indeed, the Agencies abandoned their original optimism for a more ominous outlook for the GSEs. Both Treasury and the FHFA thought the Third Amendment aimed to wind up the GSEs—in other words, the GSEs would not return to operating capacity. Treasury announced that the Third Amendment would "expedite the wind down of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac" and ensure that the GSEs "will be wound down and will not be allowed to  retain profits, rebuild capital, and return to the market in their prior form."92  The FHFA Acting Director also noted that there "seems to be broad consensus that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will not return to their previous corporate forms," that the "preferred course of action is to wind down the [GSEs]," and that the Third Amendment "reinforce[d] the notion that the [GSEs] will not be building capital as a potential step to regaining their former corporate status."93  Once again, in a report to Congress, the FHFA explained that it was "prioritizing [its] actions to move the housing industry to a new state, one without Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac."94  Treasury and the FHFA did not attempt to hide their intentions, or, if they did, they weren't very good at it. Instead, they proclaimed loudly and proudly that they wanted to transfer wealth from the Shareholders to Treasury in an effort to wind up Fannie's and Freddie's affairs.
But to wind up the GSEs' affairs, the FHFA needed to follow HERA's carefully crafted procedures. The FHFA could be designated as receiver for the GSEs and put them on the path to liquidation. But that is not the path that the FHFA chose—the FHFA was designated as conservator. By evading the receivership label, the FHFA could unilaterally bleed the GSEs' assets for its own use. The Shareholders were essentially denied their property rights in GSE assets. Even worse, the FHFA evaded any judicial oversight to ensure compliance with HERA's receivership procedures.
The Sixth, Seventh, and D.C. Circuits determined that the Third Amendment falls squarely within the FHFA's authority operate the GSEs, carry on business, transfer or sell assets, and do so in the GSEs' or its own best interests.95  These courts characterize the Shareholders' complaint as attacking the "necessity or financial wisdom" of the net worth sweep, reasoning that "Congress could not have been clearer about leaving those hard operational calls to FHFA's managerial judgment."96 
Admittedly, judges are not experts at Byzantine financial dealings or long-term market strategy. But interpreting statutes is squarely in the judicial wheelhouse. The FHFA may not hide behind the label of conservator to insulate itself from meaningful judicial review. Instead, we must apply well-settled principles underlying conservatorships to determine if the FHFA's actions were within its statutory authority. Simply put, HERA requires the FHFA as conservator to act in a certain way, and the net worth sweep is inconsistent with those requirements. Draining the GSEs' entire net worth in perpetuity makes rehabilitation—a core function of  conservatorships—impossible. The net worth sweep was thus inconsistent with what a conservator may do, under HERA or otherwise.
That the GSEs have returned to profitability is of no matter. This case concerns whether a discrete action by the FHFA falls within its statutory conservatorship authority. The net worth sweep strips the GSEs of their capital reserves, and it is thus antithetical to the FHFA's statutory command that it "preserve and conserve the assets and property" of the GSEs.97  Yet the net worth sweep persists—and it persists indefinitely.
This violates the FHFA's principal duty as conservator to "put the [GSEs] in a sound and solvent condition."98  One of the FHFA's regulatory duties over the GSEs is "to ensure that [the GSEs] operate[] in a safe and sound manner, including maintenance of adequate capital."99  And FHFA regulations suggest that allowing this transfer of capital to Treasury, thereby depleting the conservatorship assets, is incompatible with its "statutory charge to work to restore a regulated entity in conservatorship to a sound and solvent condition."100  Without capital reserves, the net worth sweep left the GSEs extremely vulnerable to market fluctuations and risked further reliance on Treasury's funding commitment. This risk increased each year as the reserve cap decreased, supporting the position that the net worth sweep is inconsistent with the statutory command to take actions "necessary to put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition.101  The FHFA Director said it best: Allowing the GSEs to operate without a reserve buffer is "irresponsible."102 
To be sure, the GSEs are now permitted to retain a $3 billion capital reserve amount under the net worth sweep.103  But removing the GSEs' entire net worth beyond that reserve cap still risks increasing Treasury's liquidation preference. In fact, the GSEs have incurred additional debt in order to pay Treasury under the net worth sweep. Ordering the GSEs to further weaken their financial position in this manner is inconsistent with the FHFA's statutory authority.
Congress carefully delineated the FHFA's powers as conservator. And courts have a responsibility to ensure that the FHFA does not exceed those powers. By holding otherwise, the majority opinion forecloses any recourse the Shareholders have to ensure that their property rights are protected by HERA's mandatory procedures.
* * *
In a legal system governed by the Rule of Law, investors rely on predictable, well-settled principles of conservatorships and receiverships and the consistent interpretation of these terms by courts. HERA established the FHFA in order to stabilize and restore confidence in the United  States housing market. In drafting the statute, Congress built HERA on the foundation of FIRREA, importing the accompanying predictable, deep-dyed common-law principles of conservatorships. Importantly, when the FHFA acts as conservator, Congress requires it to "preserve and conserve" the property and assets of the GSEs.
The FHFA abandoned this duty as conservator when it enacted the net worth sweep, thus barring the GSEs from earning and maintaining a profit. In essence, the FHFA began to wind up the GSEs and place them into liquidation—a power reserved for its role as receiver.104  But the FHFA had not been designated as receiver, and it disregarded the receiver-specific statutory protections afforded to the GSEs and their investors.
Nothing in the statute prevents the FHFA from being designated and acting as a receiver. Perhaps all this litigation could have been avoided had the FHFA done so. But the FHFA has made its statutory bed, and now it must lie in it. If the FHFA wishes to wind up the GSEs, it must comply with the statutory procedures designating itself as receiver and terminating the conservatorship first. Having failed to do just that, the FHFA exceeded its statutory authority.
HERA neither bars review of the Shareholders' APA claim nor authorizes the FHFA as conservator to bleed the GSEs profits in perpetuity. Because the majority opinion holds otherwise, I respectfully dissent.

 

