, joined by JONES, SMITH, OWEN, ELROD, HO, DUNCAN, ENGELHARDT, and OLDHAM, Circuit Judges:
The bicentennial of the United States Constitution in 1987 celebrated our Founding generation's ingenious system of separated powers: legislative, executive, and judicial. The Constitution inaugurated a revolutionary design. Madisonian architecture infused with Newtonian genius—three separate branches locked in synchronous orbit by competing interests. "Ambition . . . made to counteract ambition," explained Madison, making clear that this law of constitutional motion, using friction to combat faction, was a feature, not a bug.1  Our Constitution's most essential attribute, the separation of powers, presumes conflict, which, counterintuitively, produces equilibrium as the branches behave not as willing partners but as wary rivals. And our Constitution's paramount aim, preserving individual liberty, presumes that branches will behave neither centripetally (seizing other branches' powers) nor centrifugally (ceding their own), but jealously (defending their assigned powers against encroachment). No mere tinkerers, the Framers upended things. Three rival branches deriving power from three unrivaled words — "We the People" — inscribed on the parchment in supersize script. In an era of kings and sultans, nothing was more audacious than the Preamble's first three words, a script-flipping declaration that ultimate sovereignty resides not in the government but in the governed.
The Constitution's 200th birthday coincided with a centennial, the 100th birthday of the federal administrative state.2  Congress's passage in 1887 of the Interstate Commerce Act, making railroads the first industry subject to federal regulation, and the Act's creation of the nation's first federal regulatory body, the Interstate Commerce Commission, profoundly altered the Framers' tripartite structure. The ICC was an amalgam of all three powers, blending functions of all three branches. The administrative state has sprouted since then. But this iron truth endures: Even the most well-intentioned bureaucrats, no less than presidents, legislators, and judges, are bound by constitutional principles. An agency is restrained by the four corners of its enabling statute and "literally has no power to act . . . unless and until Congress confers power upon it."3  And Congress, when creating agencies, is itself constrained—at all times—by the separation of powers.
* * *
The plaintiffs (the Shareholders) own shares in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. In 2008 Fannie and Freddie's new regulator, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, placed them in conservatorship. FHFA secured financing from the Treasury to keep  Fannie and Freddie afloat. That relationship continued, and in 2012 FHFA and Treasury adopted a Third Amendment to their financing agreements. Under the Third Amendment, Fannie and Freddie give Treasury nearly all their net worth each quarter as a dividend.
The Shareholders have two principal objections to this arrangement:
First, the Third Amendment exceeded FHFA's statutory powers. FHFA's enabling statute gives it general powers to use as either conservator or receiver. The statute grants other, more directed powers to FHFA as conservator or receiver respectively. As conservator, the agency may take actions "(i) necessary to put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition; and (ii) appropriate to carry on the business of the regulated entity and preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated entity."4  These enumerated conservator powers don't vanish in the glare of the more general ones. Congress created FHFA amid a dire financial calamity, but expedience does not license omnipotence. The Shareholders plausibly allege that the Third Amendment exceeded FHFA's conservator powers by transferring Fannie and Freddie's future value to a single shareholder, Treasury. In Parts I-VI of this opinion, a majority of the en banc court holds that this claim survives dismissal under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6).
Second, the Shareholders argue that FHFA lacked authority to adopt the Third Amendment because its Director was not removable by the President. We adhere to the panel's reasoning and conclusion that FHFA's design, an independent agency with a single Director removable only "for cause," violates the separation of powers.5  In Parts VII-VIII of this opinion, a majority of the en banc court holds that the Director's "for cause" removal protection is unconstitutional.
The remaining question is what remedy the Shareholders are entitled to. A different majority of the en banc court holds that prospective relief is the proper remedy. In Judge Haynes's opinion,6  a majority holds that the Shareholders can only obtain a declaration that the FHFA's structure is unconstitutional.
We REVERSE the judgment dismissing Count I and REMAND that claim for further proceedings. We AFFIRM the judgment dismissing Counts II and III. The court REVERSES the judgment as to Count IV and REMANDS that claim for entry of judgment that the "for cause" removal limitation in 12 U.S.C. § 4512(b)(2) is unconstitutional.
I
During last decade's housing-market crisis, Congress passed and President George W. Bush signed the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA).7  The statute created FHFA as an independent agency to oversee the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac). Fannie and Freddie are government-sponsored entities (GSEs) that also have private shareholders, including the plaintiffs in this case. Some background on FHFA and the GSEs is useful.8 
  A
Congress created Fannie Mae in 1938.9  Its purposes include "provid[ing] stability in the secondary market for residential mortgages," "increasing the liquidity of mortgage investments," and "promot[ing] access to mortgage credit throughout the Nation."10  Congress created Freddie Mac in 1970 to "increase the availability of mortgage credit for the financing of urgently needed housing."11  Among other activities, Fannie and Freddie purchase mortgages originated by private banks, bundle the mortgages into income-producing securities, and sell the securities to investors.
In 2007, mortgage delinquencies and defaults sparked a bank liquidity crisis that kindled a recession. At the time, Fannie and Freddie controlled combined mortgage portfolios of approximately $5 trillion—nearly half the United States mortgage market. They suffered multi-billion dollar losses. Indeed, the GSEs lost more in 2008 ($108 billion) than they had earned in the previous thirty-seven years combined ($95 billion).12  But they remained solvent because they had taken a relatively conservative mortgage-investing approach. They continued to support the United States home-mortgage system as distressed banks failed.
In 2008, the President signed HERA into law to protect the national economy from further losses. HERA established FHFA as an "independent agency of the Federal Government" and classified Fannie and Freddie as "regulated entit[ies]" under FHFA.13 
B
A single Director leads FHFA.14  He is "appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate."15  The Director serves a term of five years, "unless removed before the end of such term for cause by the President."16  The Director designates three Deputy Directors.17  In case of a vacancy in the Director office, "the President shall designate [one of the Deputy Directors] to serve as acting Director until the return of the Director, or the appointment of a successor."18 
Other features strengthen FHFA's independence. It runs on annual assessments collected from the GSEs, not public or appropriated money.19  It is "advise[d]" by the Federal Housing Finance Oversight Board: the Secretary of the Treasury, the  Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the FHFA Director.20  But the Board's power is Lilliputian. It "may not exercise any executive authority, and the Director may not delegate to the Board any of the functions, powers, or duties of the Director."21 
FHFA regulates normal GSE operations. The Director must issue regulations, guidelines, or orders necessary to oversee the GSEs and ensure their sound operations.22  FHFA also has enforcement authority. The Director may bring charges against a GSE for unsound practices or violating the law.23  He may issue cease-and-desist orders, require the GSE to remedy any violations, and impose penalties.24 
C
FHFA is not just a regulator. Under 12 U.S.C. § 4617 it may serve as conservator or receiver for the GSEs. FHFA has discretion to appoint itself conservator or receiver in some cases, and receivership is mandatory in other critical insolvency situations.25  Conservatorship and receivership are mutually exclusive: Appointing FHFA as receiver "shall immediately terminate any conservatorship established for the regulated entity under this chapter."26 
D
Section 4617 next provides FHFA's general powers as conservator or receiver. In either role, FHFA is a successor to the GSE:
The Agency shall, as conservator or receiver, and by operation of law, immediately succeed to—
(i) all rights, titles, powers, and privileges of the regulated entity, and of any stockholder, officer, or director of such regulated entity with respect to the regulated entity and the assets of the regulated entity . . . .27 
Similarly, FHFA in either role may operate the GSE:
The Agency may, as conservator or receiver—
(i) take over the assets of and operate the regulated entity with all the powers of the shareholders, the directors, and the officers of the regulated entity and conduct all business of the regulated entity;
(ii) collect all obligations and money due the regulated entity;
(iii) perform all functions of the regulated entity in the name of the regulated entity which are consistent with the appointment as conservator or receiver;
(iv) preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated entity; and
(v) provide by contract for assistance in fulfilling any function, activity, action, or duty of the Agency as conservator or receiver.28 
And FHFA in either role may exercise incidental powers to carry out those enumerated:
Incidental powers
 The Agency may, as conservator or receiver—
(i) exercise all powers and authorities specifically granted to conservators or receivers, respectively, under this section, and such incidental powers as shall be necessary to carry out such powers; and
(ii) take any action authorized by this section, which the Agency determines is in the best interests of the regulated entity or the Agency.29 
FHFA in either role may also order a shareholder, director, or officer to perform any function.30  And in either role it may transfer or sell any GSE asset or liability without consent.31  FHFA in either role also benefits from an anti-injunction provision:
Except as provided in this section or at the request of the Director, no court may take any action to restrain or affect the exercise of powers or functions of the Agency as a conservator or a receiver.32 
E
Other powers depend on capacity. Section 4617 grants some powers to FHFA as conservator only:
Powers as conservator
The Agency may, as conservator, take such action as may be—
(i) necessary to put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition; and
(ii) appropriate to carry on the business of the regulated entity and preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated entity.33 
It grants other powers to FHFA as receiver only:
Additional powers as receiver
In any case in which the Agency is acting as receiver, the Agency shall place the regulated entity in liquidation and proceed to realize upon the assets of the regulated entity in such manner as the Agency deems appropriate . . . .34 
Receivership, then, grants a power and duty to liquidate the GSE. Unsurprisingly, § 4617 next provides a regime for the receiver's orderly processing of creditor claims.
It is extensive. As receiver FHFA must publish and mail notice to creditors to present their claims.35  It generally must allow or disallow a claim within 180 days of filing.36  It must expedite certain secured claims with potential for irreparable injury.37  It may also make rules for allowing and disallowing claims.38  And it must allow proven claims.39  Creditors may alternatively pursue their claims in U.S. district court.40  The receivership scheme qualifies the succession provision by carving out surviving shareholder and creditor rights:
[T]he appointment of the Agency as receiver . . . and its succession, by operation of law, to the rights, titles, powers, and privileges described in subsection (b)(2)(A) shall terminate all rights and claims that the stockholders and creditors of the regulated entity may have  against the assets or charter . . . except for their right to payment, resolution, or other satisfaction of their claims, as permitted under subsections (b)(9), (c), and (e).41 
In short, FHFA as receiver must divide the GSEs' assets between creditors and shareholders according to law.
F
Congress also amended the GSEs' charters by giving Treasury temporary authority to purchase their securities.42  In connection with any purchase, it required Treasury to make an "[e]mergency determination" that the purchase would "(i) provide stability to the financial markets; (ii) prevent disruptions in the availability of mortgage finance; and (iii) protect the taxpayer."43  Congress also prescribed six mandatory considerations for exercising the authority, "[t]o protect the taxpayers."44  The temporary purchase authority terminated on December 31, 2009, except for Treasury's rights under purchases already made.45 
II
In September 2008, FHFA appointed itself a conservator for the GSEs. The next day, Treasury and the GSEs entered Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements. Treasury made a capital commitment, capped at $100 billion per GSE, to keep them from defaulting. In return, Treasury received one million senior preferred shares in each GSE. These shares entitled Treasury to:
• a $1 billion senior liquidation preference;
• a dollar-for-dollar increase in that preference each time a GSE drew on the capital commitment;
• quarterly dividends of either an amount equal to 10% of the liquidation preference, or a 12% increase in the liquidation preference itself;
• warrants allowing Treasury to purchase up to 79.9% of common stock;
• and periodic commitment fees.
The Agreements also prohibited the GSEs from declaring a dividend or making any other distribution without Treasury's consent.
Treasury and FHFA later amended the Agreements. In May 2009 they adopted the First Amendment: Treasury agreed to double its funding commitment to $200 billion per GSE. In December 2009 they adopted the Second Amendment: Treasury agreed to an increased, adjustable commitment to account for the GSEs' losses. As of August 2012, the GSEs had drawn approximately $187 billion from Treasury's funding commitment. But they lacked the cash to pay 10% dividends. So in August 2012 FHFA and Treasury adopted the Third Amendment to the Agreements.
The Third Amendment replaced the quarterly 10% dividend with variable dividends equal to the GSEs' entire net worth except a capital reserve. The Shareholders call this arrangement the "net worth sweep." The capital reserve buffer started at $3 billion. It decreased annually until it reached zero in 2018. This arrangement was a double-edged sword. The GSEs no longer struggled to make dividend payments, but they would also no longer accrue capital. Treasury also suspended the periodic commitment fees. Treasury announced that the Third Amendment would "expedite the wind down of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac" and ensure that the  GSEs "will be wound down and will not be allowed to retain profits, rebuild capital, and return to the market in their prior form."46  A federal official commented privately that the Third Amendment was designed to prevent Fannie and Freddie from recapitalizing.47 
The net worth sweep transferred a fortune from Fannie and Freddie to Treasury. When this suit was filed, the GSEs had paid $195 billion in dividends under the net worth sweep. Under the Agreements more broadly, Treasury had disbursed $187 billion and recouped $250 billion, thanks largely to the net worth sweep.
III
The Shareholders sued FHFA, its Director, Treasury, and its Secretary (the Agencies). They assert four causes of action, three statutory and one constitutional:
• In Count I, they allege the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(C), (D), affords relief because FHFA exceeded its statutory conservator authority under 12 U.S.C. § 4617(b)(2)(D).
• In Count II, they allege the APA, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(C), (D), affords relief because Treasury exceeded its securities-purchase authority under 12 U.S.C. §§ 1455(l), 1719(g). Specifically, they allege that Treasury purchased securities after the sunset period, failed to make the required "[e]mergency determination[s]," and disregarded statutory "[c]onsiderations."
• In Count III, they allege the APA, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A), affords relief because Treasury's adoption of the net worth sweep was arbitrary and capricious.
• In Count IV, they allege FHFA violates Article II, §§ 1 and 3 of the Constitution because, among other things, it is headed by a single Director removable only for cause.
The Shareholders seek a declaration that the net worth sweep violates HERA and is arbitrary and capricious; a declaration that FHFA's structure violates the separation of powers; an injunction against Treasury to return net-worth sweep dividends (or treat them as paying down the liquidation preference); vacatur of the net worth sweep; and an injunction against further implementation of the net worth sweep.
The Agencies each moved to dismiss all claims under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6). And the Shareholders and FHFA both moved for summary judgment on Count IV, the constitutional claim. The district court granted the Agencies' motions to dismiss Counts I-III based on the anti-injunction provision. And it granted summary judgment to FHFA on the merits of Count IV. The Shareholders appealed.
A panel of this court affirmed as to the statutory claims and reversed as to the constitutional claim.48  We then granted rehearing en banc, vacating the panel decision.49  Before rehearing en banc, both FHFA and Treasury admitted the merits of Count IV: FHFA's structure violates the separation of powers. But, several months after rehearing en banc, FHFA  reversed its position again. It now contends that FHFA's structure is constitutional. Treasury stands by its contrary position. And FHFA and Treasury maintain that for a number of other reasons the Shareholders are not entitled to relief on Count IV.
IV
The rules governing jurisdiction and our standard of review are familiar.
Jurisdiction. The district court had jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
Standard of review. "We review de novo a district court's rulings on a motion to dismiss and a motion for summary judgment, applying the same standard as the district court."50  "To survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'"51  "A claim has facial plausibility when the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged."52  Summary judgment is proper if "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."53  We may consider a fact undisputed "[i]f a party . . . fails to properly address another party's assertion of fact."54 
V
We begin with Counts I-III, the Shareholders' statutory claims. Before reaching the merits, we must decide whether they are justiciable under HERA's anti-injunction provision and succession provision.
A
HERA's anti-injunction provision limits court action against FHFA's conservator or receiver powers:
Except as provided in this section or at the request of the Director, no court may take any action to restrain or affect the exercise of powers or functions of the Agency as a conservator or a receiver.55 
To interpret this provision, we consult its plain meaning and its past judicial interpretations (including in predecessor statutes).
The Supreme Court instructs that plain meaning comes first: "Statutory construction must begin with the language employed by Congress and the assumption that the ordinary meaning of that language accurately expresses the legislative purpose."56  Under the anti-injunction provision's plain meaning, we may not grant any relief that interferes with — "restrain[s] or affect[s]" — FHFA's conservator powers. Logically, then, we may still grant relief against action taken outside those powers. The anti-injunction provision deflects claims about how the conservator  used its powers, not claims it exceeded the powers granted. It distinguishes improperly exercising a power (not restrainable) from exercising one that was never authorized (restrainable).
Past judicial interpretations confirm this view. Congress borrowed much of HERA's text from the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA).57  FIRREA authorizes the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to act as conservator or receiver for distressed banks.58  FIRREA's vintage conservator and receiver scheme, including the anti-injunction provision, is materially similar to HERA's.59  So is one of FIRREA's own predecessors, the Financial Institutions Supervisory Act of 1966 (FISA), which governed conservatorship and receivership by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC).60  If FIRREA is HERA's parent, FISA is a grandparent.
The Supreme Court tells us that those provisions' judicial interpretations guide our analysis of HERA. "[W]here, as here, Congress adopts a new law incorporating sections of a prior law, Congress normally can be presumed to have had knowledge of the interpretation given to the incorporated law, at least insofar as it affects the new statute."61  "And when 'judicial interpretations have settled the meaning of an existing statutory provision, repetition of the same language in a new statute indicates, as a general matter, the intent to incorporate its judicial interpretations as well.'"62 
The Supreme Court interpreted FISA's anti-injunction provision in Coit.63  It held the provision did not strip federal jurisdiction over claims in a FSLIC receivership.64  Rather, it "simply prohibit[ed] courts from restraining or affecting . . . those receivership 'powers and functions' that have been granted by other statutory sources."65  So the anti-injunction provision didn't affect whether a particular power existed in the first place.66 
 We have applied Coit to FIRREA's anti-injunction provision. In Onion we held that the provision prevented a federal court from stopping a conservator's foreclosure and sale.67  In Ward, relying on Onion, we held that the anti-injunction provision stopped a federal court from rescinding a receiver's sale.68  We elaborated that there is a "difference between the exercise of a function or power that is clearly outside the statutory authority of the RTC on the one hand, and improperly or even unlawfully exercising a function or power that is clearly authorized by statute on the other."69 
Ward is the anti-injunction provision's strongest expression. We declined to review even whether the receiver breached its express statutory duty to maximize the property's value.70  But we did so based on the understanding that, even if the receiver sold the property for inadequate value, it had "improperly or unlawfully exercised an authorized power or function," not "engage[d] in an activity outside its statutory powers."71  Ward's facts are different from this case. In Ward, selling low instead of high was an improper use of the receiver's power to liquidate assets. But here, FHFA as conservator essentially liquidated assets without ever being appointed receiver. Improperly exercising a power is not restrainable, but exercising one beyond statutory authority is.
Other circuits follow the same interpretation. Even our sister courts that rejected claims like Counts I-III acknowledge the same rule: "Section 4617(f) will not protect the Agency if it acts either ultra vires or in some third capacity" besides conservator or receiver.72  So have circuits deciding unrelated cases against FHFA. To quote the Ninth Circuit, "the anti-judicial review provision is inapplicable when FHFA acts beyond the scope of its conservator power."73  And the Eleventh Circuit holds that "[t]he FHFA cannot evade judicial scrutiny by merely labeling its actions with a conservator stamp."74 
The provision's plain meaning, FIRREA precedent, and HERA precedent show that we may grant relief if FHFA exceeded its statutory powers. The Agencies primarily contend that the Third Amendment falls within the conservatorship powers, 12 U.S.C. § 4617(b)(2). As we explain below, that is incorrect, at least at the pleading stage. But first, we address  the Agencies' arguments from disconnected provisions.
The Agencies suggest Treasury's temporary purchase authority authorized the Third Amendment.75  Congress authorized Treasury to "purchase any obligations and other securities issued by the [GSEs] . . . on such terms and conditions . . . and in such amounts as the Secretary may determine."76  It also authorized Treasury "at any time[] [to] exercise any rights received in connection with such purchases."77 
But these provisions cannot sustain the Agencies' argument. "Congress . . . does not alter the fundamental details of a regulatory scheme in vague terms or ancillary provisions—it does not, one might say, hide elephants in mouseholes."78  Authorizing Treasury to enter an open-ended category of transactions does not override the elaborate powers scheme in FHFA's enabling statute.79 
The Agencies also contend that Congress ratified the Third Amendment in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016.80  This act restricted Treasury from disposing of certain shares, specifically including its rights under the Third Amendment, until 2018.81  The statute's most favorable reading for Treasury is that, in directing Treasury to retain its Third Amendment interest, Congress recognized or enacted that interest's lawfulness.82 
The Appropriations Act does not support that reading. In directing Treasury to retain preferred shares, it speaks to future conduct, not past action. The Supreme Court has "recognized congressional acquiescence to administrative interpretations of a statute in some situations, [but] ha[s] done so with extreme care."83  Treasury faces "a difficult task in overcoming the plain text and import of [HERA]" with a later enactment.84  Here, the Appropriations Act only established a going-forward requirement to maintain the status quo. That is not enough to show that the Agencies' past actions accorded with HERA. The Agencies' conservatorship theory looms large over markets and federal conservatorships, so we presume Congress did not stealthily ratify it in an appropriations rider—hiding an elephant in a mousehole.85 
 It follows that whether the anti-injunction provision bars relief on Counts I-III depends entirely on whether the net worth sweep exceeded FHFA's statutory conservatorship powers.86 
B
The Agencies next invoke HERA's succession provision as a defense. When appointed conservator, FHFA succeeds to certain shareholder rights:
The Agency shall, as conservator or receiver, and by operation of law, immediately succeed to . . . all rights, titles, powers, and privileges of the regulated entity, and of any stockholder, officer, or director of such regulated entity with respect to the regulated entity and the assets of the regulated entity . . . .87 
The Agencies say that FHFA succeeded to the Shareholders' right to bring derivative suits, and Counts I-III are derivative. Generally speaking, "[t]he derivative form of action permits an individual shareholder to bring 'suit to enforce a corporate cause of action against officers, directors, and third parties,'" whereas a direct cause of action belongs to the shareholder himself.88 
Other circuits have held that FHFA succeeded to derivative claims but not direct.89  They have textual support: The succession provision transfers shareholders' rights "with respect to the regulated entity and [its] assets."90  Simultaneously, under a separate provision, shareholders and creditors retain "their right to payment, resolution, or other satisfaction of their claims" in the receivership claim-processing scheme.91  This means some claims survive the succession provision. And it makes sense to define those claims as direct ones. The ordinary meaning of claims "with respect to" a GSE and its assets does not include a shareholder's personal claims. And FIRREA decisions took a similar view.92 
To decide whether Counts I-III are direct or derivative, we begin with the cause of action. Counts I-III assert rights under the APA. Under 5 U.S.C. § 702, "[a] person suffering legal wrong . . . or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute is entitled to judicial review." And under 5 U.S.C. § 706, "[t]he reviewing court shall . . . hold unlawful and set aside agency action" that is arbitrary and capricious, exceeds statutory authority, or is otherwise unlawful.
The APA cause of action is broad. The "Administrative Procedure Act . . . embodies the basic presumption of judicial review to one 'suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute.'"93  "[J]udicial review of a final agency action by an aggrieved person will not be cut off unless there is persuasive  reason to believe that such was the purpose of Congress."94  An APA claim must be justiciable under Article III, but otherwise who may sue is in Congress's hands.95  Congress has granted an APA claim to any party that alleges "the challenged action had caused them 'injury in fact,' and . . . the alleged injury was to an interest 'arguably within the zone of interests to be protected or regulated' by the statutes that the agencies were claimed to have violated."96 
"Whether a plaintiff comes within the zone of interests . . . requires us to determine, using traditional tools of statutory interpretation, whether a legislatively conferred cause of action encompasses a particular plaintiff's claim."97  The Supreme Court once considered the zone of interests a matter of "prudential standing," but now calls it one of statutory interpretation.98  The Court "ha[s] said, in the APA context that the test is not 'especially demanding.'"99  It has "conspicuously included the word 'arguably' in the test to indicate that the benefit of any doubt goes to the plaintiff."100  "[T]he test 'forecloses suit only when a plaintiff's interests are so marginally related to or inconsistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it cannot reasonably be assumed that' Congress authorized that plaintiff to sue."101  The zone of interests "is to be determined not by reference to the overall purpose of the Act in question . . . but by reference to the particular provision of law upon which the plaintiff relies."102 
Count I, to the extent it has merit, is a direct claim. The Shareholders suffered injury in fact—they were excluded from the GSEs' profits. And they are within the zone of interests HERA protects. Count I alleges that FHFA violated 12 U.S.C. § 4617(b)(2)(D)—the grant of conservator powers. The Shareholders' economic value is "arguably within the zone of  interests" for this provision.103  It is axiomatic that shareholders are the residual claimants of a firm's value.104  They are among the first beneficiaries of the "sound and solvent condition" that a conservator is empowered to pursue.105  And they ordinarily have a claim on the "assets and property" that a conservator is empowered to "preserve and conserve."106  For example, in James Madison, the D.C. Circuit held a bank shareholder could challenge the FDIC's appointment as the bank's receiver under FIRREA.107 
Plus, HERA elsewhere states that the succession provision does not extinguish the Shareholders' right to pursue their claims in receivership.108  This matters because Count I essentially alleges that an improper conservatorship preempted rights that could have been redeemed in receivership.109  Because the Shareholders are within the zone of interests protected by HERA's enumeration of conservator powers, they have a direct claim.
And the prudential shareholder-standing rule does not change this analysis. The rule is "a strand of the standing doctrine that prohibits litigants from suing to enforce the rights of third parties."110  But for APA claims, "Congress itself has pared back traditional prudential limitations."111  The APA does not abolish the shareholder-standing doctrine. But it limits it in some cases. James Madison is one example, because the court held it had jurisdiction to review the shareholder's APA action against appointment of a receiver.112  The Supreme Court decisions City of Miami and Lexmark also support this point: For very broad statutory rights like the APA, an injury in fact and inclusion in the zone of interests can add up to a right of action, even if prudential standing limits would have blocked it.113  That is  the case here.
In so holding, we do not say that there is no direct-derivative distinction for APA claims. Nor is it true that any shareholder may obtain review of agency action affecting his holdings. In Thompson v. North American Stainless, LP, the Supreme Court rejected the "absurd" proposition that shareholders could sue under Title VII employment protections.114  Shareholders are not within Title VII's zone of interests because "the purpose of Title VII is to protect employees from their employers' unlawful actions."115  But a corporate reorganization statute is a different animal. Shareholders may be within its zone of interests, and here they are.116 
Counts II and III, however, are not within the asserted statutes' zone of interests. In Count II the Shareholders allege that Treasury violated 12 U.S.C. §§ 1455(l), 1719(g), which granted it authority to purchase securities in the GSEs. They say the net worth sweep effectively purchased securities after these provisions' 2009 sunset and otherwise exceeded the purchase authority.117  In Count III they allege that Treasury acted arbitrarily and capriciously under those same sections because it never made the requisite "[e]mergency determination."118 
Congress granted this purchase authority to protect markets, consumers, and taxpayers, not GSE stakeholders. The emergency determination asks whether a purchase will stabilize markets, prevent disruptions in mortgage finance, and protect taxpayers.119  And the statutes' mandatory "[c]onsiderations" are likewise public-oriented: Treasury must consider the GSEs' condition, and any transaction's structure, "[t]o protect the taxpayers."120  So we agree with the district court, though for a different reason, that Counts II and III must be dismissed.
VI
We now consider Count I's substantive allegation that the net worth sweep exceeded FHFA's conservator powers. Like any federal agency, FHFA "literally has no power to act . . . unless and until Congress confers power upon it."121  This principle is enshrined in statute: "The reviewing court shall . . . hold unlawful and set aside agency action, findings, and conclusions found to be . . . in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations . . . ."122  It is recognized in prominent Supreme Court decisions and implicit in countless others.123  The warning that "[i]f  we are to continue a government of limited powers, these agencies must themselves be regulated" remains as fresh as ever.124 
A
To define FHFA's statutory authority, we "follow the cardinal rule that a statute is to be read as a whole, since the meaning of statutory language, plain or not, depends on context."125  Emphasis on isolated provisions at the expense of other, more applicable ones is "hyperliteral and contrary to common sense."126  As Learned Hand explained, "[w]ords are not pebbles in alien juxtaposition; they have only a communal existence."127  Our analysis proceeds in three parts: HERA's plain meaning, its past judicial interpretations (including FIRREA precedent), and insight from common-law conservatorship.
1
Under HERA's plain meaning, FHFA as conservator has limited, enumerated powers. To begin with, conservator and receiver are distinct and mutually exclusive roles. HERA says FHFA may "be appointed as conservator or receiver for the purpose of reorganizing, rehabilitating, or winding up the affairs of a regulated entity."128  In ordinary use, the word "or" is "almost always disjunctive, that is, the words it connects are to be given separate meanings."129  So FHFA may not occupy both roles simultaneously. To the same point, "[t]he appointment of the Agency as receiver . . . shall immediately terminate any conservatorship."130  Similarly, the incidental powers provision authorizes FHFA to "exercise all powers and authorities specifically granted to conservators or receivers, respectively, under this section, and such incidental powers as shall be necessary to carry out such powers."131  In short, the FHFA Director may appoint the agency as either conservator or receiver, but once he does so, FHFA's powers depend on the role.
Some powers do overlap. HERA grants general powers to FHFA as either conservator or receiver. In either capacity, FHFA is a successor to the GSE.132  It succeeds to the GSE's and its stakeholders' "rights, titles, powers, and privileges . . . with respect to the regulated entity and [its] assets."133  Similarly, FHFA in either capacity has power to operate the  GSE.134  This includes taking over its assets, operating its business, collecting obligations, performing its functions, preserving and conserving its assets and property, and entering contracts.135  The list goes on: In either role FHFA may transfer assets or liabilities136  ; cause other stakeholders to perform functions137  ; pay obligations138  ; issue subpoenas139  ; and exercise incidental powers.140 
But that list has an end. Other powers depend on which role FHFA occupies. The statute enumerates FHFA's separate "[p]owers as conservator":
The Agency may, as conservator, take such action as may be—(i) necessary to put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition; and (ii) appropriate to carry on the business of the regulated entity and preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated entity.141 
Then it enumerates "[a]dditional powers as receiver":
"In any case in which the Agency is acting as receiver, the Agency shall place the regulated entity in liquidation and proceed to realize upon the assets of the regulated entity in such manner as the Agency deems appropriate, including through the sale of assets . . . ."142 
The receiver powers also include organizing a successor enterprise143  and administering a detailed claim-processing scheme.144 
The receiver powers stand in contrast to the conservator powers. As receiver, FHFA gains the power to liquidate the GSE and realize on its assets.145  It also gains the power to notice, review, and determine creditors' claims.146  A conservator does not have these powers. If it did, a conservator could liquidate the GSE's assets without following HERA's detailed claim-processing scheme.
The Agencies contend that the general powers to "operate the regulated entity" and "conduct all [its] business,"147  or "transfer or sell any asset or liability of the regulated entity in default,"148  authorize the net worth sweep. But if read so broadly, these provisions would obliterate the receivership claim-processing duties. If a conservator or receiver may enter any transaction as part of "operat[ing]" the GSE and "conduct[ing]" its business,149  there is no bar to circumventing HERA's creditor and shareholder protections.
That would raze the receiver's duties to notice and adjudicate claims.150  It would also be inconsistent with creditors' and shareholders' right to have their claims paid in receivership.151  So it cannot  be a correct reading. "In construing a statute we are obliged to give effect, if possible, to every word Congress used."152  And "the canon against surplusage is strongest when an interpretation would render superfluous another part of the same statutory scheme."153 
Rather than give the general powers their broadest possible meaning, we give them a meaning consistent with the separate conservator and receiver powers. A coherent interpretation of these provisions is not just reasonable, it is mandatory. In RadLAX, the Supreme Court held that when "a general authorization and a more limited, specific authorization exist side-by-side" in the same statute, "the particular enactment must be operative, and the general enactment must be taken to affect only such cases within its general language as are not within the provisions of the particular enactment."154  In this situation "[t]he general/specific canon . . . avoids not contradiction but the superfluity of a specific provision that is swallowed by the general one."155  Other Supreme Court authority similarly warns against applying a general provision at the expense of more specific ones.156 
Applying this to HERA, § 4617(b)(2)(D) enumerates the conservator's specific powers to "put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition," "carry on [its] business," and "preserve and conserve" its assets. The shared conservator-receiver powers are more general and would swallow the rest of the statute if interpreted broadly. So the more "particular enactment must be operative."157  "[M]ay means may" and "'may' is, of course, 'permissive rather than obligatory.'"158  But here "may" is a grant of power that enables FHFA to act. FHFA as conservator may not exercise a power beyond the ones granted.159 
The incidental-powers provision does not change this. It gives FHFA other powers "necessary to carry out" its enumerated ones.160  We doubt that Congress "in fashioning this intricate . . . machinery, would thus hang one of the main gears on the tail pipe."161  Including near-unlimited conservatorship powers in this provision would swallow a large chunk of HERA.  And incidental powers are those "necessary to carry out" the powers granted to "conservators or receivers, respectively."162  This links incidental powers to enumerated ones and recognizes the conservator-receiver distinction. In short, any exercise of an incidental power must serve an enumerated power.163  Beyond limited powers to "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets and property, FHFA would lack any intelligible principle to guide its discretion as conservator. This would permit essentially any action that could be characterized as "reorganizing" the GSEs and would eviscerate many pages of 12 U.S.C. § 4617.
The best-interests clause is also consistent with this reading. That clause, within the incidental-powers provision, authorizes FHFA to "take any action authorized by this section, which the Agency determines is in the best interests of the regulated entity or the Agency."164  Permitting the conservator to act in its own interest may appear to depart from the traditional view of a conservator as fiduciary. But the best-interests clause modifies FHFA's authority "as conservator or receiver,"165  and it only affects actions that are otherwise "authorized by this section."166  So FHFA may pursue its own interests only within the conservator's enumerated powers. It may not, for example, wind down a GSE and jettison receivership protections all in its own best interests. That would not be "authorized by this section." Instead, this clause is a modest addition to traditional conservatorship powers. It may permit related-party transactions that would otherwise be inconsistent with fiduciary duties.167 
2
FIRREA decisions also demonstrate the conservator's limited, enumerated powers.168  FIRREA's conservator-powers provision is materially identical to HERA's.169  In McAllister we interpreted that provision to "state[] explicitly that a conservator only has the power to take actions necessary to restore a financially troubled institution to solvency."170  We are in good company—the Fourth, Eighth, Ninth, Eleventh, and D.C. Circuits have articulated similar views.171  Under FIRREA, a  conservator has power to steward the bank's assets, not to make every conceivable use of them.
3
The common-law meaning of "conservator" also shows it has limited powers. The Supreme Court recognizes a "settled principle of interpretation that, absent other indication, Congress intends to incorporate the well-settled meaning of the common-law terms it uses."172  And "absence of contrary direction may be taken as satisfaction with widely accepted definitions, not as a departure from them."173 
There is no shortage of authority for traditional conservatorship. Well before HERA, or even FIRREA, the Supreme Court recognized that a conservator has limited powers and must conserve the ward's property.174  Under the Uniform Probate Code, a "conservator" is a fiduciary held to the same standard of care as a trustee.175  And according to the Congressional Research Service, "[a] conservator is appointed to operate the institution, conserve its resources, and restore it to viability."176  Black's Law Dictionary defines "conservator" as "[a] guardian, protector, or preserver . . . the modern equivalent of the common-law guardian," and it defines "managing conservator" as "[a] person appointed by a court to manage the estate or affairs of someone who is legally incapable of doing so."177 
Tethering the conservator's powers to traditional principles of insolvency is both sound and indispensable. FHFA's present Director has explained that "[a] market economy depends upon predictable rules to govern competition. These rules must include . . . predictable and fair standards to allocate losses and rehabilitate or liquidate a company when it cannot pay its debts."178  Considering this need for continuity, HERA's conservator powers must  be interpreted in light of both FIRREA decisions and traditional conservatorship.179  These authorities "reflect a fundamental difference between the missions of a conservator, which seeks to reorganize, and a receiver, which seeks to liquidate."180 
Congress built FIRREA, and later HERA, on this common-law understanding. Until recently, FHFA agreed. It told Congress in 2010 that "[t]he purpose of conservatorship is to preserve and conserve each company's assets and property and to put the companies in a sound and solvent condition."181  In 2011, it had a "statutory mission to restore soundness and solvency to insolvent regulated entities and to preserve and conserve their assets and property."182  In a 2012 regulation, it said "FHFA's duties as conservator require the conservation and preservation of the Enterprises' assets. . . . [A]ny goal-setting must be closely linked to putting the Enterprises in sound and solvent condition."183  These contemporary statements align with the traditional understanding of conservatorship.
Congress did not repudiate common-law conservatorship in FIRREA or HERA. Instead, it consistently authorized the FDIC and then FHFA to put entities in a "sound and solvent condition," "carry on th[eir] business," and "preserve and conserve th[eir] assets and property."184  Neither HERA's general powers, implied powers, nor right to act in FHFA's own best interest is the kind of "contrary direction" that quells common-law conservatorship.185  A conservatorship of Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac (here, both) sways an entire industry. Given the potential effect on markets, firms, and consumers, partial suggestions are not enough to show that HERA inverted traditional conservatorship.186  "Conservator" is an old role's anchor, not a new role's banner.187 
B
Now to apply this understanding of conservator powers to the Third Amendment. We hold the Shareholders stated a plausible claim that the Third Amendment exceeded statutory authority. Transferring substantially all capital to Treasury, without limitation, exceeds FHFA's powers to put the GSEs in a "sound and solvent condition," "carry on the[ir] business," and "preserve and con serve [their] assets and property."188  We ground this holding in statutory interpretation, not business judgment.
In adopting the net worth sweep, the Agencies abandoned rehabilitation in favor of "winding down" the GSEs. Treasury announced that the Third Amendment would "expedite the wind down of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac" and ensure that the GSEs "will be wound down and will not be allowed to retain profits, rebuild capital, and return to the market in their prior form."189  The FHFA acting Director also said that the Third Amendment "reinforce[d] the notion that the [GSEs] will not be building capital as a potential step to regaining their former corporate status."190  In a report to Congress, FHFA explained that it was "prioritizing [its] actions to move the housing industry to a new state, one without Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac."191  For reasons we are about to explain, this "wind down" exceeded the conservator's powers and is the type of transaction reserved for a receiver.
As a textual matter, the net worth sweep actively undermined pursuit of a "sound and solvent condition," and it did not "preserve and conserve" the GSEs' assets.192  Treasury has collected $195 billion under the net worth sweep.193  This alone exceeds the $187 billion it invested.194  After paying back more than the initial investment, the GSEs remain on the hook for Treasury's entire $189 billion liquidation preference.195  And under the net worth sweep, Treasury has a right to the GSEs' net worth in perpetuity.196 
FHFA had authority, of course, to pay back Treasury for the GSEs' draws on the funding commitment. The funding commitment provided liquidity and took on risk, so Treasury was also entitled to compensation for the cost of financing. But the net worth sweep continues transferring the GSEs' net worth indefinitely, well after Treasury has been repaid and the GSEs returned to sound condition. That kind of liquidation goes beyond the conservator's powers.
FIRREA precedent confirms that this exceeds statutory conservator powers. In Elmco Properties, the Fourth Circuit held that a creditor was unlawfully deprived of its claim because it never received notice of the receivership.197  The creditor had notice of a conservatorship. But "the RTC as conservator cannot . . . liquidate a failed bank. Instead, the conservator's function is to restore the bank's solvency and preserve its assets."198  Dividing up and distributing the institution's property is inconsistent with a conservator's powers, so the creditor in Elmco was not on inquiry notice to pursue its claim.199  To "wind down" the  GSEs' affairs here, FHFA needed to follow HERA's carefully crafted receivership procedures. But FHFA was never appointed receiver, so it lacked authority to bleed the GSEs' profits in perpetuity.
Finally, based on the Shareholders' allegations, the net worth sweep is inconsistent with conservatorship's common-law meaning. In United States v. Chemical Foundation, the Supreme Court characterized a wartime enemy-property custodian as "a mere conservator" with "the powers of a common-law trustee."200  And a common-law conservator may not give the ward's assets to a single shareholder, just as a fiduciary or trustee may not do so.201  Admittedly, HERA modified the common-law meaning in some ways, such as by permitting use of enumerated powers in FHFA's best interest.202  But in more relevant areas HERA provided no "contrary direction" against the common-law meaning:203  It did not authorize a conservator to "wind down" the ward's affairs or perpetually drain its earnings. Under traditional principles of insolvency, investors and the market reasonably expect a conservator to "operate, rehabilitate, reorganize, and restore the health of the troubled institution," not summarily take its property.204  The Third Amendment inverts traditional conservatorship.
It is worth noting that the facts at this stage are distinguishable from those in some sister-circuit decisions. The Shareholders appeal from a dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6). The complaint alleges facts showing ultra vires action that were not present in some other cases. For example, emails suggest that the Agencies designed the Third Agreement to prevent Fannie and Freddie from recapitalizing. National Economic Council advisor Jim Parrott, who worked with Treasury in developing the net worth sweep, allegedly wrote: "[W]e've closed off [the] possibility that [Fannie and Freddie] ever[] go (pretend) private again."205  Similarly, when Bloomberg published a comment that "[w]hat the Treasury Department seems to be doing here, and I think it's a really good idea, is to deprive [Fannie and Freddie] of all their capital so that [they can not go private again]," Parrott emailed the source: "Good comment in Bloomberg — you are exactly right on substance and intent."206  The emails reinforce that the Third Amendment "deprive[d]" the GSEs of their capital, keeping them in a permanent state of suspension, which is not authorized by statutory conservator powers.207  The pleadings in  Jacobs v. Federal Housing Finance Agency208  and Perry Capital LLC v. Mnuchin209  appear to lack similar allegations. That factual difference distinguishes them.
But Saxton v. Federal Housing Finance Agency210  and Roberts v. Federal Housing Finance Agency211  had facts similar to the Shareholders' allegations here. So we recognize that our decision conflicts with at least some other circuits. The conflict is whether HERA authorized FHFA to adopt the Third Amendment. We think that, in interpreting HERA's conservatorship and receivership scheme, FHFA's general powers should not render specific ones meaningless. This is especially true because, although HERA qualifies traditional conservatorship, it does not eviscerate it. So traditional principles of insolvency and FIRREA decisions remain relevant. And they counsel against a near-limitless view of FHFA's conservator powers.
The complaint states a plausible claim that FHFA exceeded its statutory authority. Judge Haynes's dissent suggests that the Shareholders could waive the legal standard for reviewing the grant of a motion to dismiss. But the Supreme Court explained in Iqbal that "[t]o survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'"212  The standard is generally applicable, and we see no exception here. When we reverse the grant of a motion to dismiss, the district court may decide if fact issues require trial or if summary judgment should be granted.213  The proper remedy is to reverse the motion-to-dismiss denial and remand Count I for further proceedings.
VII
We now turn to Count IV, the Shareholders' constitutional claim. Although the Shareholders could theoretically obtain full relief under Count I alone, they appeal from the dismissal of that count, so the parties have yet to litigate it to judgment. On the constitutional claim, in contrast, both sides moved for summary judgment in the district court. So we consider whether the Shareholders are entitled to some or all of their requested relief on this record alone. We first consider Count IV's justiciability based on standing and the succession provision.214 
A
Federal courts have power to decide "Cases" and "Controversies."215  "That case-or-controversy requirement is satisfied only where a plaintiff has standing."216  At its "irreducible constitutional  minimum," standing requires plaintiffs to show they suffered "an injury in fact," the injury is "fairly traceable" to the defendant's actions, and the injury will "likely . . . be redressed by a favorable decision."217  "The party invoking federal jurisdiction bears the burden of establishing these elements."218  Here, the summary-judgment standard applies to jurisdictional facts.219 
The Shareholders suffered injury in fact. The required injury to challenge agency action is minimal: The Supreme Court has "allowed important interests to be vindicated by plaintiffs with no more at stake in the outcome of an action than a fraction of a vote, a $5 fine and costs, and a $1.50 poll tax."220  The Agencies contend that, by the time of the net worth sweep, the Shareholders had no rights to dividends and their shares were delisted from the New York Stock Exchange. But pumping large profits to Treasury instead of restoring the GSEs' capital structure is an injury in fact.221 
The Shareholders' injury is traceable to the removal protection. The Agencies contend that the President's undisputed control over FHFA's counterparty, Treasury, shows that a President-controlled FHFA would have adopted the net worth sweep. But standing does not require proof that an officer would have acted differently in the "counterfactual world" where he was properly authorized.222  In Free Enterprise Fund, the Supreme Court explained that "the separation of powers does not depend on the views of individual Presidents, nor on whether 'the encroached-upon branch approves the encroachment.'"223  And in Bowsher v. Synar, the Court said that "[t]he separated powers of our Government cannot be permitted to turn on judicial assessment of whether an officer exercising executive power is" likely to be fired.224  The Shareholders observe that FHFA's status as an "independent" counterparty could actually have boosted the Third Amendment's political salability. Fortunately, under Synar and Free Enterprise Fund, we need not weigh in on that counterfactual.
And the relief sought would redress the Shareholders' injury. The Agencies contend that vacating past agency action is improper in a removal case and in this case particularly. But the form of injunctive or declaratory relief is a merits  question.225  The Shareholders seek, among other things, vacatur of the net worth sweep. That would redress their injury.
The Shareholders have standing.
B
The succession provision does not bar Count IV because it does not bar any direct claims.226  A plaintiff with Article III standing can maintain a direct claim against government action that violates the separation of powers.227  In Bond v. United States the Supreme Court collected numerous separation-of-powers cases litigated by individuals with an otherwise-justiciable case or controversy.228  "If the constitutional structure of our Government that protects individual liberty is compromised, individuals who suffer otherwise justiciable injury may object."229 
There is a separate reason the succession provision does not bar the Shareholders' constitutional claim. "[W]here Congress intends to preclude judicial review of constitutional claims its intent to do so must be clear."230  Only a "heightened showing" in the statute may be interpreted to "deny any judicial forum for a colorable constitutional claim."231  Here, the succession provision does not cross-reference the Administrative Procedure Act's general rule that agency action is reviewable.232  It does not directly address judicial review at all. This is not the kind of "heightened showing"233  or "'clear and convincing' evidence"234  required for Congress to deny review of constitutional claims.
VIII
The Shareholders are entitled to judgment on Count IV.
A
HERA's for-cause removal protection infringes Article II. It limits the President's removal power and does not fit within the recognized exception for independent agencies. That exception, established in Humphrey's Executor v. United States, has applied only to multi-member bodies of experts.235  A single agency director  lacks the checks inherent in multilateral decision making and is more difficult for the President to influence.236  We reinstate Part II B 2 of the panel opinion, which holds that FHFA's structure is unconstitutional.237  That Part explains that the Director's removal protection, in combination with other FHFA features, is inconsistent with Article II and the separation of powers. It also distinguishes the D.C. Circuit's PHH Corp. decision.238 
We disagree with Judge Higginson's attempt to distinguish this removal protection from those the Supreme Court has held unconstitutional. He cites scholarship that HERA's "for cause" removal provision gives less protection than statutes limiting removal to "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office."239  Initially, requiring "cause" for removal is well recognized as an independent agency's threshold feature.240  And in Synar, when the Supreme Court considered a statute permitting Congress to remove an official for "inefficiency," "neglect of duty," or "malfeasance," it held this alternative language is quite broad.241  True, the removal protection that Free Enterprise Fund held unconstitutional was exceptionally strict.242  But the Court held that the proper amount of second-level removal protection there was none, not a relaxed amount.243 
Judge Higginson also points to uncertainty about whether and how a removal would unfold. But the Court in Synar "reject[ed] [the] argument that consideration of the effect of a removal provision is not 'ripe' until that provision is actually used."244  In Synar this was because Congress's removal authority gave it effective control over the Comptroller in the status quo.245  Although here the problem is an absence of control, not its misplacement, the same "ripeness" principle applies.
B
The Agencies contend the Shareholders are not entitled to relief for other reasons. They first say that the FHFA acting Director who adopted the Third Amendment was, unlike a normally appointed Director, not insulated from removal. Under 12 U.S.C. § 4512(b)(2), the Director serves for five years "unless removed before the end of such term for cause by the President." That provision does not explicitly address acting Directors. Under 12 U.S.C. § 4512(f),  the President chooses any acting Director from among the Deputy Directors. And that provision does not explicitly address removal.
But HERA unequivocally says what kind of agency it creates: "There is established the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which shall be an independent agency of the Federal Government."246  In history and Supreme Court precedent, Presidential removal is the "sharp line of cleavage" between independent agencies and executive ones.247  So we do not read the procedural guidance for choosing an acting Director to override the removal restriction, much less FHFA's central character. Instead, we read these provisions together.248  The removal restriction applied to the acting Director.
Judge Costa's contrary authorities are distinguishable. In Swan v. Clinton, the D.C. Circuit held that the President could remove a National Credit Union Administration Board member serving in a "holdover" capacity.249  But here the FHFA acting Director was not a holdover serving past his term's end. So at least one of Swan's concerns, that "the absence of any term limit in the NCUA holdover clause enables holdover members to continue in office indefinitely," is misplaced.250  And, while HERA's general removal protection is unequivocal,251  in Swan "[t]he NCUA statute d[id] not expressly prevent the President from removing NCUA Board members except for good cause."252  The court simply assumed the statute protected Board Members during their normal terms, then held any such protection did not extend to holdover Members.253  In short, Swan interprets a different statute and has limited value for generalizing a rule.
Judge Costa also cites the Office of Legal Counsel opinion Designating an Acting Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.254  That opinion is about filling a vacancy under the CFPB's enabling statute and the Federal Vacancies Reform Act. Its reasoning includes a general rule that statutory removal protection does not extend to anyone temporarily performing an office.255  But it relies principally on Swan for that proposition, and it doesn't explain why the same rule cuts across different enabling statutes. As a matter of statutory interpretation, HERA's removal restriction applied to the acting Director here.
C
Treasury also contends that FHFA in its conservator capacity does not exercise executive power, so violating the separation of powers was harmless here. Treasury cites Beszborn, where we held that  the RTC as receiver exercised nongovernmental power in suing on behalf of the institution in receivership.256  "[T]he suit was purely an action between private individuals."257  So later criminal prosecution of the same defendants did not violate the Double Jeopardy Clause because the first "punishment," the civil suit, was not sought by a sovereign.258  Treasury also observes that private parties are sometimes appointed as receivers.259 
Whether an agency exercises government power as conservator or receiver "depends on the context of the claim."260  In Slattery, the Federal Circuit held that the FDIC as receiver acted for the United States when it retained a surplus from the seized bank's assets.261  "[T]he claims [we]re asserted against the government, seeking return of the monetary surplus obtained for the seized bank."262  So the bank's former shareholders could maintain their claims against the United States.263 
The Third Amendment has more in common with Slattery than with Beszborn, showing that it invoked executive power. In Beszborn, we took care to say the receiver's action on the bank's behalf benefited "all stockholders and creditors of the bank" rather than "the United States Treasury."264  The Third Amendment reversed this precisely. It transferred the wards' assets to the government, similar to retaining the liquidation surplus in Slattery.265  FHFA is a federal agency, empowered by a federal statute, enriching the federal government. It adopted the Third Amendment with federal governmental power. And that power was executive in nature. The Agencies do not contend, nor could they, that the Third Amendment was quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial.266 
Treasury's remaining arguments do not budge this point. It cites 12 U.S.C. § 191 and 12 C.F.R. § 51.2 as evidence that private parties can be receivers. But every conservator or receiver relies on some public authority, whether court or agency.267  Even in Treasury's example, "[t]he receiver performs its duties under the direction of the Comptroller."268  In this case,  Congress empowered FHFA as a federal agency.269  Absent that authority there would be no conservatorship and no Third Amendment. And every federal agency must function within the federal Constitution's checks and balances. As then-Judge Kavanaugh explained in his PHH Corp. dissent, a constitutional agency structure serves "to protect liberty and prevent arbitrary decisionmaking by a single unaccountable Director."270 
Finally, Treasury's attempt to distinguish the Third Amendment from governmental power is not, in any event, a standing argument. In the Appointments Clause case Freytag v. Commissioner, the Supreme Court held that whether the official acted as an Officer of the United States in the particular decision challenged was "beside the point" for standing purposes.271  The Court rejected the Commissioner's argument that the taxpayers lacked standing to complain about the special trial judge's role in other cases.272  If by statute he performed at least some duties of an Officer of the United States, his appointment must accord with Article II.273  This case is analogous.274 
* * *
The Constitution bounds Congress's power to create agencies, draw their structure, and grant them authority. Agencies with removal-protected principal officers were a unique, but recognized, blend of legislative, executive, and judicial powers long before the FHFA. Their unique position has also been relatively static, until recently. The removal-protected FHFA Director is a new innovation and falls outside the lines that Humphrey's Executor recognized. Granting both removal protection and full agency leadership to a single FHFA Director stretches the independent-agency pattern beyond what the Constitution allows.
HAYNES