.
I agree with the Court that under Barshop 1  the Edwards Aquifer Authority became effective on the date of our opinion in that case. The issue as briefed to us, however, and as addressed at length by the court of appeals, raised a more fundamental legal question: When does an appellate-court judgment become final and take effect? This vexing question will no doubt recur and, in my view, warrants the Court's rulemaking attention. To some degree, the issue has a certain "angels dancing on the head of a pin" quality to it, interesting (to some) as a matter of logic and perplexing (to all) as a matter of practice. It is confounding, to be sure, but also consequential.
So I join in the Court's judgment and, like JUSTICE BRISTER, most of its opinion. But as a general matter the better  default date is the mandate, the formal order declaring our review complete, our decision final, and our judgment enforceable. Yogi Berra was right: In law as in life, "It ain't over 'til it's over." 2  
* * *
An appellate court's mandate is the official order declaring to the district court, the parties, and all other interested persons that the court has closed the book on its review and is once-and-for-all finished. I can understand, therefore, why the court of appeals and Chemical Lime view the date of our mandate in Barshop as when the Authority and the Edwards Aquifer Authority Act became effective. Their position is hardly unreasonable. A decision from this Court, of course, is subject to a motion for rehearing, and can also be reconsidered on our own motion. 3  
The Authority says the date of the Barshop mandate is inappropriate because issuance of the mandate is merely the "ministerial act" of a court clerk. 4  I disagree. The mandate under our rules is not a mere ministerial postscript or duplicative reminder. Our rules require appellate courts to prepare a mandate, without which an appellate-court judgment cannot be enforced. 5  
Several statutes also tie the finality of appellate-court decisions to issuance of the mandate. 6  If the mandate served no  meaningful purpose there would be no need to require one.
In addition, Texas Rule of Appellate Procedure 18.6 makes clear that appellate-court judgments in accelerated appeals, when time is of the essence, are not effective until the mandate issues. It would be peculiar to hold, as the Authority urges, that our judgment in an ordinary, unexpedited appeal takes effect instantly when the rules make plain that our judgment in an accelerated appeal 7  takes effect only "when the mandate is issued." 8  
The parties make several arguments as to whether the trial court's judgment was superseded while Barshop was on appeal, and whether the trial court was obliged to follow Barshop immediately upon its issuance. The Authority argues the State was exempt from the requirement of filing a supersedeas bond under Section 6.001 of the Civil Practice and Remedies Code, and therefore the trial court's declaratory judgment was automatically suspended when the State perfected its appeal. 9  
The Authority also argues that the trial court's injunction against enforcement of the Act dissolved immediately when we issued our decision in Barshop. The Authority cites Poole v. Giles, where we stated that an appellate "order dissolving a temporary injunction is effective immediately even though not final." 10  It further cites Texas Workers' Compensation Commission v. Garcia, in which we observed that even though the trial court and court of appeals had declared the Workers' Compensation Act unconstitutional, they had not issued injunctions, and the Workers' Compensation Commission had "accordingly continued implementing the Act notwithstanding the judgments of the courts below." 11  In contrast, we stated in Barshop that "[b]ecause of the district court's injunction," the Act "has yet to be implemented," but we concluded by holding that the injunction "is dissolved." 12  
The court of appeals distinguished the trial court's injunction and its declaratory judgment, reasoning that even if, immediately after our Barshop decision, "the district court could not enforce its injunction with contempt power . . . this does not mean that the supreme court's judgment declaring the [Act] constitutional and reversing the district court's contrary declaration also became effective at that time." 13  Chemical Lime, too, contends that the Barshop judgment had no effect on the trial court's declaratory judgment until our mandate issued, and that "[d]istinctions between injunctive and declaratory relief are irrelevant for this purpose."
Chemical Lime further takes issue with the Authority's contention that the State's notice of appeal in Barshop automatically superseded the trial court's judgment, characterizing this position as inconsistent with the position the State took in Barshop. In Barshop we noted the State's position that it was before the Court "seeking authorization to implement the Act," and that we should construe the Act "to merely require that the declarations be filed with the Authority six months after the eventual effective date of the statute." 14  Chemical Lime argues that even if ordinarily the State was not required to post a supersedeas bond, the trial court in Barshop purported in its judgment to exercise its discretion "to deny supersedeas of this Judgment." Chemical Lime contends the State chose not to challenge the order denying supersedeas and should not now be heard to argue that its notice of appeal in Barshop automatically superseded the judgment in that case. 15  Indeed, taking the Authority's argument to its logical conclusion might mean the Act was effective when the State filed its notice of appeal in Barshop in 1995, and the six-month window for filing declarations of historical use expired before our opinion issued on June 28, 1996.
As the Court notes, these arguments regarding supersedeas and other issues are not dispositive, 16  and they obscure a key point. I do not believe the trial court or the parties would have acted in a manner inconsistent with our opinion in Barshop after it issued, regardless of whether, in some technical sense, the injunction immediately dissolved when we so stated in Barshop or the trial-court judgment was superseded at the time. I assuredly do not suggest parties may flout an appellate-court decision or judgment merely because the mandate has not yet issued.
Nevertheless, our Barshop decision was still not "final" 17  when issued in one important sense: We were still free to reconsider it and hold the Act unconstitutional or otherwise correct or modify our opinion or judgment. This authority of the issuing court to modify its own opinion or judgment ordinarily extends until the mandate issues, regardless of whether the judgment awards monetary, injunctive, or declaratory relief.
Although in exceptional circumstances we can recall the mandate, 18  the date of the mandate is ordinarily the appellate court's formal and final order signaling it is finished with its review of the case and considers its decision final and its judgment enforceable. 19  Indeed, by correspondence the clerk advised the trial court and  parties in Barshop as follows when the mandate issued: "The judgment of the Supreme Court of Texas is now final in the above referenced cause. As Rule 18.6, Tex. R. App. P., has been satisfied, we have issued the mandate as of today." As the court of appeals aptly noted, the period between judgment and mandate affords the court "the opportunity to correct an appellate judgment before commanding its execution and enforcement in the lower court." 20  An appellate court can issue a mandate earlier than the rules ordinarily prescribe if it has good cause for making its judgment more immediately final and enforceable. 21  Moreover, this Court has discretion to shorten the time for filing a motion for rehearing or even to disallow such a motion altogether. 22  Again, if opinions were immediately final for all purposes upon issuance, there would be no need for a mandate and no reason for courts sometimes to issue mandates early or to shorten the usual timetable for rehearing motions.
The date of the mandate, therefore, is generally the date the parties' duties become fixed. 23  In this case, it was the date that all uncertainties regarding the Act's constitutionality were finally and definitively dispelled.
JUSTICE BRISTER points out many peculiarities in the law (complicated, it seems, by our inconsistent adherence to myriad rules and internal practices). 24  As between the opinion and the judgment, I  agree with JUSTICE BRISTER that the judgment is more "operative" -- the judgment takes action; the opinion explains why. I also agree that "judgments should mean what they say," but the question remains: Which judgment? 25  An appellate court can reconsider its judgment and the opinion on which it rests until the mandate issues, the date finality attaches. 26  
I appreciate JUSTICE BRISTER's point that the judgment merits instant respect. But if a judgment is operative for all purposes upon issuance, what exactly is the mandate of a mandate--why enact rules and statutes that tie finality and enforceability to something that amounts to Seinfeld-ian  nothingness? 27  It seems odd that a decision would be fully effective yet neither final nor enforceable. 28  
I agree with the Court that our decision in Barshop itself decides today's case. I agree, too, with JUSTICE BRISTER that our decisions "can take effect whenever we say they do," 29  but as a general default rule, I would treat the mandate as a more-than-clerical act. It is the judicial equivalent of "Yes, that's my final answer" -- the dispositive order concluding the appeal, declaring the judgment final and enforceable, and commanding that the judgment be "recognized, obeyed, and executed." I trust the Court's rulemaking process will focus its expertise on this important issue and deliver bright-line guidance going forward.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: June 26, 2009

 

