; Eva M. Guzman; Debra H. Lehrmann; Jeffrey V. Brown  
Concur




Justice Willett, concurring.
In 1935 a stone carver named Wood Hall risked his life for nearly three weeks to chisel twelve words across the iconic centerpiece of the University of Texas campus: "Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free."1 

The UT Tower, the definitive landmark of a world-renowned "University of the first class,"2  soars 307 feet. The 360-degree view from high above is spectacular, stretching far and wide.3 
Once the site of unspeakable sorrow, the Tower is the signature backdrop for exultant commencements and is regularly illuminated in orange to mark athletic championships and academic honors—plus Texas Independence Day, of course.
When the words from John's Gospel were inscribed above the south entrance to the Tower's Victorian-Gothic Main Building, the building fittingly served as the University's central library, the place where truth was sought and curiosity quenched.
The architecture is commanding, and from the observation deck roughly two-dozen stories above Jesus's words, one can locate other Austin landmarks that help tell the story of perpetually curious UT System Regent Wallace Hall:
• Texas Capitol—where Governor Rick Perry appointed, and the Senate confirmed, Hall to the System's governing board, and where Regent Hall's dogged inquiries regarding various matters at flagship UT-Austin, most notably improper favoritism in admissions, sparked legislative and  criminal investigations of his penchant for requesting records and posing uncomfortable questions;
• UT System Offices—where the Board of Regents heard the results of an external investigation confirming "frequent pressure" to admit students "connected to influential people,"4  and where the Board adopted measures to deny Regent Hall access to a disk containing the unredacted records compiled in the investigation;
• Tex as Attorney G ener al' s Office—where the state's chief legal officer concluded that Regent Hall, as a System fiduciary charged with overseeing UT governance, has an inherent right of access to the records underlying the Kroll Report,5  thus spurring the Board, two days later, to stiffen its information-access rules for Regents; and
• Texas Supreme Court—where the years-long saga ends, the Court having concluded that Regent Hall's ultra vires suit against the chancellor (the first by a regent against the University or the chancellor since UT opened in 1873 with eight professors and 221 students) cannot overcome the State's sovereign immunity.
UT sculptor Wood Hall is probably unrelated to UT Regent Wallace Hall. But both risked much in service to the twelve words of aspiration-both scholarly and heavenly-etched onto UT's most iconic building.
I join the Court's opinion. The doctrine of sovereign immunity, by insulating imprudence, is innately unfair to those wronged. The deal it strikes is often a raw deal.
* * *
Everything is bigger in Texas, including political theater, and the odyssey of Wallace Hall is, like most Texas tales, filled with outsized personalities. Regent Hall has never been bashful about asking unwelcome questions. He is inquisitive. His detractors brand his inquiries an inquisition. He is probing. His decriers consider his probes a problem. He is questioning. His disparagers deem his questions a quandary. Regent Hall takes his oversight role seriously, spurred by a no-nonsense fiduciary duty to the University, including the specific statutory responsibility to "set campus admission standards."6  But his questions about wrongdoing (and not just about admissions) have sown discord. The Board considers Regent Hall's request for the Kroll disk less oversight than overreach.
The Board of Regents did much to keep critical documents away from Regent Hall, instituting, as the Court describes it, "a governance structure that leaves Hall at the mercy of the Chancellor's discretionary legal determination."7  But even before the Board's July ratification of the chancellor's proposed two-step process, the Hall hubbub had already incited rules changes. In May 2015, just two days after the Attorney General issued his pro-Hall opinion—concluding the Board "may not prohibit an individual regent from obtaining access to records in the possession of the University that are necessary to fulfill his duties as a  regent"8 —the Board made telling deletions to Regents' Rule 10101 § 3.1:
In carrying out the duties and responsibilities referenced . . . above, it is the responsibility of each Regent to be knowledgeable . . . and each member of the Board of Regents has the right and authority to inform himself/herself as to the duties, responsibilities, and obligations of the member
in such a manner as they each may deem proper. Members of the Board of Regents are to be provided access to such information as
in their individual judgments will enable them to fulfill their duties and responsibilities as Regents of the U.T. System.
Besides dialing back § 3.1's prior emphasis on Regents' individualized discretion and judgment, the Board that same day also (1) amended § 5.4.5 to require a Board majority (up from two votes) to approve a Regent's unresolved information request, and (2) adopted § 5.4.6 to delegate to the chancellor the duty of applying federal privacy law. The Attorney General's pro-access opinion predated—indeed, likely provoked—these Hall-proofing restrictions, and the Attorney General's brief in this Court argues that Regent Hall, as a member of the UT's governing board charged with setting admissions policies, satisfies the federal "legitimate educational interest" standard that entitles him to access the complete, unredacted Kroll file.9 
But Regent Hall did not sue his fellow Regents for limiting his right to access. He sued the chancellor, who carried out the Board's directive to strip out confidential material. The chancellor's record redactions were carried out at their behest. As the Court explains, his withholding of unredacted records did not exceed his granted authority; it was fully within it—intra, not ultra, his vires—per the Regents' express, parameter-setting command: Regents' Rule 10801 § 5.4.6. Regents' rules carry the same legal force as an enactment of the Legislature and prescribe the chancellor's specific responsibilities.10  It may seem a distinction without a difference, to name the CEO instead of the Regents to whom the CEO reports. But amid the Byzantine complexity of sovereign-immunity law, which admittedly elevates form over substance, missing a procedural bull's-eye is sometimes fatal.11  As the Court notes, the limits on Regent Hall's claimed right to complete access "are limits imposed by the Board . . . attributable to the Board and no one else."12  We take suits as we find them, and this one, ably argued by both sides, named the chancellor who enforced the Regents' access restrictions rather than the Regents who enacted them.
The Court recognizes the disquieting concerns raised by the Board's access restrictions: "We are not unsympathetic to Hall's plight."13  Under Texas law, individual Regents owe an individual duty to  exercise individual judgment.14  That necessarily requires individual access. The Legislature does not see a Regency as a sinecure, but as a solemn fiduciary committed to institutional accountability, including blowing a whistle on potential improprieties. The Board's new access hurdles have the potential to short-circuit unwanted inquiries by Regents who, like Wallace Hall, wield an abundance of verve and resolve. The Court concedes as much, noting the access scheme perhaps "elevates the status quo above transparency,"15  something Machiavelli warned of 500 years ago: "the reformer has enemies in all those who profit by the old order, and only lukewarm defenders in all those who would profit from the new order."16 
* * *
"Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."17 
I am not a Longhorn alumnus. But I revere what is doubtless the most-read inscription on the Forty Acres, an inscription I hope, notwithstanding today's result, will hearten future truth-seekers and truth-tellers . . . til Gabriel blows his horn.18 
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: January 27, 2017
JUSTICE GUZMAN, concurring.
Contrary to a well-known aphorism, silence is not always golden.1  Silence has a cost. Silence allows for injustice, stunts growth, and thwarts change. The case before us today submits further proof that enlightenment comes from questions, even more than answers.2 
Following Regent Wallace L. Hall Jr.'s inquiries about the University of Texas's admission practices, then-Chancellor Francisco Cigarroa initiated an internal investigation that uncovered concerns about external influences on admission decisions at UT. Further inquiry and disclosures prompted the University to commission an independent external audit of admission practices. In pursuing the matter further, UT's governing body, the UT System  Board of Regents,3  expressed the conviction that "the integrity of the admissions process at a public university depends upon the unbiased determination of the appropriate merits of each applicant; that attempts to unduly influence the process are inappropriate; and that a student should not be advantaged or given special consideration as a result of . . . connections or financial resources."4 
After an extensive six-month investigation involving several hundred thousand pages of documents, the independent auditor, Kroll Associates, reported its findings to the University shortly after Admiral William H. McRaven's succession as Chancellor of the UT System. According to the publicly released Kroll Report, a pattern and practice of considering applicants outside the regular admission process existed at UT, causing "increasing levels of tension" between the Admissions Office and the University President's office, but resulting in only a "handful" of applicants being admitted over the Admissions Office's objection each year.5  Though an increasing number of applicants had been considered for admission in this manner, Kroll found that a relatively small number of "arguably less-qualified applicants" actually benefitted from the practice.6 
While no evidence existed that spots had been "save[d]" for certain applicants or that any applicant had been admitted based on a quid pro quo or other inappropriate promise or exchange, Kroll determined it was "readily apparent that certain applicants are admitted at the instigation of the President over the assessment of the Admissions Office," for a variety of reasons.7  This aspect of UT's admission processes had not been publicly disclosed, however.8  Nor had undisclosed admission practices been divulged during the internal investigation, which Kroll characterized as constituting "material omissions [that] misled the [internal] inquiry." In that regard, the report concluded that key UT officials failed "to speak with the candor and forthrightness expected of people in their respective positions of trust and leadership."9 
The Kroll Report concludes that, while disconcerting, the admission practices did not violate any existing law, rule, or policy. Nevertheless, issues of fairness and transparency were implicated and guidance for University officials was merited.10  Considering a variety of sources for best practices, Kroll outlined recommended policies and procedures for avoiding undue influence in university admissions, if the Chancellor and Board of Regents determined that such reforms were necessary.11 
In response to the Kroll Report, Chancellor McRaven convened a Blue Ribbon  panel of former chancellors and University presidents to review UT's admission processes in light of the Kroll Report's findings and recommendations. The panel made recommendations for strengthening the admission process at UT. Thus, prompted by Regent Hall's inquiries, deficiencies that threatened to undermine the integrity of the admission process were exposed and addressed.
The upshot is that inquiries can and do spur positive change when those with the power to act are willing to engage in critical self-examination, as UT's Chancellor and Board of Regents did in this case. But does that mean there are no more inquiries to be made? Not in Regent Hall's view. And not from the perspective of the two other regents who supported his motion to review the documents provided to Kroll Associates.12  All have expressed concern that regents must have the information they need to fulfill their duties and responsibilities to the UT System, including "the legal responsibilities of a fiduciary in the management of funds under the control of institutions subject to the board's control and management."13  All have questioned whether regents—guardians of the University's welfare and reputation—can make informed decisions if they do not have access to the underlying data and documents on which recommended policies and procedures are based. Context is often vitally important, and as the Court observes here, "facts are the greatest ally" in the quest for change.14  I fully agree.
Yet, the record before the Court reflects that Regent Hall has not been denied access to the documents Kroll Associates reviewed. Rather, he was offered—and has accepted—access to the Kroll documents with certain student information redacted, information that is, at least in some respects, confidential under the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA).15  He has also been offered—but declined—a process bywhich to obtain all the information he seeks, a process that ostensibly balances privacy interests against an assurance of legitimate need. The process reflects the governing body's judgment that an individual regent's interest in a particular matter can overcome competing privacy rights of students, but not necessarily or automatically.
The Board-adopted two-step process may have afforded Regent Hall access to all the information necessary to fulfill his obligations as a regent without the necessity of judicial intervention. But must a University official imbued with broad oversight authority for the UT System—one who is charged with setting admission standards and subject to criminal sanctions if confidential information is misused—prove his mettle before obtaining the same degree of access the Board has allowed to third parties, like Kroll Associates, and myriad UT personnel engaged in the redaction process?16  Should a regent's right  of access to confidential information be presumed or need it be established when compelling privacy interests are at stake?17 
Redressing grievances when rights and duties collide is the bread and butter of the judicial system, but our ability to decide the merits of this dispute is constrained by the limits of our jurisdiction. And this is no trifling matter.18  So, while the separate writings issued today may touch on the merits, the Court cannot, because disposition of this appeal ultimately turns on whether Hall asserts a valid ultra vires action against Chancellor McRaven. As the court of appeals held, and as this Court unanimously affirms, the answer to that threshold matter precludes further inquiry into the merits of the parties' arguments.
The Court faithfully applies ultra vires principles and our precedent in holding that Chancellor McRaven, a dedicated public servant committed to honoring the chain of command, was obliged to follow the Board of Regents' directives and therefore did not act ultra vires.19  I therefore fully join the Court's opinion and judgment. I write separately primarily to underscore that the issues raised and the applicable legal standards restrict the Court's ability to reach the merits of the underlying dispute.
The circumstances of this case also compel me to highlight the importance of judicious inquiry, especially considering that the caretakers of the University of Texas—an educational institute "of the first class"20 —are charged with cultivating scholars and future leaders. Although members of a group must work within rules that provide essential order, the events precipitating the underlying dispute confirm the benefits of being open to inquiry and examination. History, replete with examples of great debacles that might have been avoided had someone spoken up, validates the principle that "[i]t is error only, and not truth, that shrinks from inquiry."21 
Eva M. Guzman
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: January 27, 2017
Justice Lehrmann, concurring.
"[T]he secret of Education lies in respecting the pupil."1 
I agree with the Court that Regent Hall has failed to plead a valid ultra vires claim, and I join both the Court's judgment and  its thoughtful opinion. I also am mindful that the inscription on The University of Texas campus highlighted in one of today's separate writings, "ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free,"2  is much more than an inspirational musing chiseled in stone. These sacred words originating in holy scripture, so appropriately utilized by institutions of higher learning to promote academic freedom and the power of learning, undoubtedly have broad import in a democratic society. Transparency begets accountability.
Also critically important, both as a general matter and in the context of this case, are individuals' rights to choose when and under what circumstances to share private information about themselves with others. Consistent with this principle, federal law protects the confidentiality of information students disclose to educational institutions. See generally Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), 20 U.S.C. § 1232g.
I write separately to stress the importance of both of these foundational tenets, and to acknowledge that The University of Texas System has the responsibility to abide by both. For ultimately, "[c]onfidentiality and transparency are not mutually exclusive, but rather two sides of the same coin."3 
* * * *
Universities play a significant role in shaping our society. These institutions of higher learning are beacons of light, not only serving to educate our populace and to test novel theories that have the potential to improve society in a myriad of ways, but also shining as examples of excellence for generations to come. With this position comes the responsibility to uphold the highest standards of integrity.
So when the Kroll Report was published, revealing that a small number of applicants to UT-Austin's undergraduate program who had been monitored by the President's office were admitted even though their qualifications were below the norm in terms of admission criteria, members of both the university community and the public at large were justifiably concerned about the potential for improper influences on the admissions process. Although the percentage of applicants whose qualifications raised questions was quite low4  and the Kroll Report concluded the admissions practices appeared to have violated no existing law, rule, or policy, this flagship university is held to the utmost professional standards. Therefore, as a result of the report, UT-System Chancellor William McRaven convened a blue-ribbon panel to review the admissions process, and the Board of Regents subsequently adopted a new admissions policy.
Moreover, when Regent Wallace Hall requested access to the documents underlying the report, the Board granted the request subject to FERPA's mandatory  privacy restrictions, turning over tens of thousands of pages of partially redacted material. In doing so, the Board fulfilled both its obligation to disclose the requested information and its duty to comply with federal privacy laws, which required a decision to be made about what was and what was not protected information. Educational institutions are charged with the responsibility to exercise discretion in ensuring their compliance with FERPA. See 34 C.F.R. § 99.32(a) (requiring educational institutions to maintain, for "each request or disclosure" of a student's education records, a record that includes the "parties who have requested or received personally identifiable information from the education records" and the "legitimate interests the parties had in requesting or obtaining the information"). This necessarily includes the process of determining when personally identifiable student information may be properly disclosed without the student's or parent's consent. This task was assigned to Chancellor McRaven.
The discretion committed to educational institutions in complying with FERPA is exemplified by the parameters of the exception on which Regent Hall relies to request access. To that end, FERPA does not allow disclosure of protected student information to institutional officials based solely on hierarchy or position. Instead, FERPA allows an institution to disclose protected information only to those "school officials . . . who have been determined by such . . . institution to have legitimate educational interests." 20 U.S.C. § 1232g(b)(1)(A). Nor does FERPA permit disclosure to one entity to justify disclosure to another. With each revelation, the student's privacy rights must be considered anew, and an independent determination must be made that disclosure is justified on its own terms. See 34 C.F.R. § 99.32(a). Further, the administrative regulations implementing FERPA do not elaborate on what constitutes "legitimate educational interests." See id. § 99.31(a)(1)(i)(A). The Secretary of Education has expressly declined to provide more definitive guidance, explaining that "[e]ach educational agency and institution must establish its own criteria, according to its own procedures and requirements, for determining when its school officials have a legitimate educational interest in a student's records." Family Educational Rights and Privacy, 53 Fed. Reg. 11,942, 11,955 (Apr. 11, 1988) (discussion by Office of the Secretary of Education). FERPA thus demands that these determinations be fact specific so that protection of this information is maximized.
The privacy interests underlying FERPA cannot be overstated. Students trust universities with a plethora of personal information. Some of that information, such as social security numbers, is specifically required as part of the application process. But students may also choose to volunteer sensitive and potentially embarrassing information about themselves, perhaps in a personal essay, that they are not otherwise required to reveal. These students should feel comfortable in the knowledge that this information is seen only by those with a legitimate reason under FERPA.
No one disputes that Regent Hall has a legitimate educational interest in the Kroll documents generally. But, he assumes that this interest necessarily encompasses all the sensitive, personally identifiable information in those documents that unquestionably is protected by FERPA. As Chancellor McRaven argues, Regent Hall never attempted to articulate a legitimate interest in any specific information. While I agree with the Court that we need not reach the issue of whether Chancellor McRaven properly applied FERPA, I cannot fault his refusal to accept Regent  Hall's carte blanche approach in light of the privacy interests at stake.5  Compliance with FERPA, particularly its restrictions on disclosure of protected information to school officials, is a matter of internal governance and is committed to the institution's discretion. Today the Court appropriately determines that, as it stands, the law does not allow courts to interfere with the exercise of that discretion.
The University of Texas cannot pick and choose when to comply with its legal obligations. In this case, the System's chancellor complied with his responsibilities and the Board of Regents' directive by producing the information requested by Regent Hall in a manner that would safeguard FERPA-protected data. Chancellor McRaven thus acted well within his authority and, in doing so, assured students that the trust they place in the System to protect the privacy of their records is well founded.
Debra H. Lehrmann
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: January 27, 2017
Justice Brown, joined by Justice Green, concurring.
I join the Court's opinion in full and without reservation. The Court correctly decides that sovereign immunity bars Regent Wallace Hall's claims against Chancellor William McRaven. And the Court so decides, not with passion or prejudice, but with a healthy reverence for the constitutional separation of powers that compels our decision. Sovereign immunityis "an established principle of jurisprudence in all civilized nations." Beers v. Arkansas, 61 U.S. 527, 529, 15 L. Ed. 991 (1857). Indeed, it is "inherent in the nature of sovereignty." The Federalist No. 81 (Alexander Hamilton). And in our system of government, the people are the sovereign: "All political power is inherent in the people, and all free governments are founded on their authority, and instituted for their benefit." Tex. Const., art. I, § 2. As Alexander Hamilton once said, "Here, sir, the people govern."
In Texas, "the people's will is expressed in the Constitution and laws of the State," and so "to waive immunity, consent to suit must ordinarily be found in a constitutional provision or legislative enactment." Wichita Falls State Hosp. v. Taylor, 106 S.W.3d 692, 695 (Tex. 2003). We do not begrudge this balance of power. Rather, we respect it. Our role is to simply and carefully consider when the people have preserved their immunity and when they have waived it. It is not to publicly grouse when we are disappointed in the result we reach.
The Court holds today that Hall has not overcome sovereign immunity. Because that holding deprives this Court of jurisdiction to further consider the merits of Hall's claims, we do not weigh the parties' arguments on the merits. See Rusk State Hosp. v. Black, 392 S.W.3d 88, 95 (Tex. 2012) ("We have said on numerous occasions that sovereign immunity deprives courts of subject-matter jurisdiction."). It is therefore incumbent upon us to show restraint in commenting on the underlying merits of Hall's claims.
That means it matters not whether our decision protects privacy or advances transparency. And we should never worry ourselves with which party's motives are purer or more virtuous. The question we face here is whether sovereign immunity  bars the petitioner's claims. It does. Case over.
Jeffrey V. Brown
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: January 27, 2017

 

