 in part and dissenting in part.
I join today's well-reasoned decision save one quibble: Because I find Parts V.B and VI.B of the Court's opinion advisory—and thus inadvisable—I respectfully dissent from those sections.
Today the Court clarifies the standard for defining a healthcare liability claim (HCLC) and remands so the trial court can apply our new guidance. So far so good. If the trial court concludes these claims are not HCLCs, then no expert report is necessary. The Court, however, proceeds to (p)review the reports' sufficiency just in case the trial court goes the other way.
This analysis is premature. The trial court hasn't even applied our new test to determine whether these are HCLCs in the first place. I wouldn't short-circuit its review by pre-deciding an issue that might never need deciding at all and that might benefit immensely from lower-court analysis.
As a judiciary, our constitutional role dictates that we decide concrete cases and not dispense contingent advice. "[T]he judicial power does not embrace the giving of advisory opinions,"1  and prudent development of the law requires that courts refrain from speculating on situations that may never arise.
The Court's motivation, of course, is commendable: to advance judicial efficiency and squeeze out inordinate delay. But unless and until the lower courts conclude that plaintiffs' claims are indeed HCLCs, I would not suggest a premature predecision that presupposes—if not predestines—a certain lower-court path.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: August 31, 2012
Justice Lehrmann, concurring and dissenting.
Whether a claim against a health care provider is a health care liability claim is a knotty issue this Court has repeatedly struggled with. See, e.g., Tex. W. Oaks Hosp., LP v. Williams, 371 S.W.3d 171, 2012 Tex. LEXIS 561, 2012 WL 2476807 (Tex. 2012); St. David's Healthcare P'ship v. Esparza, 348 S.W.3d 904 (Tex. 2011); Omaha Healthcare Ctr., LLC v. Johnson, 344 S.W.3d 392 (Tex. 2011); Diversicare Gen. Partner, Inc. v. Rubio, 185 S.W.3d 842 (Tex. 2005). Claims alleging that a  physician's actions in examining a patient amounted to an assault can be particularly confounding, for the reasons the Court discusses: the physical examination of a patient necessarily involves touching, which may be uncomfortable, unexpected, and misunderstood. I concur in the Court's judgment remanding this case to allow the plaintiffs an opportunity to establish that their assault claims are not health care liability claims. I write separately, however, because I believe the Court places too onerous a burden on claimants by requiring them to conclusively establish that their claims are not health care liability claims. I would require a claimant to satisfy a standard comparable to a "clear and convincing" standard of proof. Under that standard, a trial court should require a claimant asserting claims against a health care provider arising in the context of the delivery of medical services to file an expert report unless the record justifies a firm conviction or belief that the claims presented are not health care liability claims.
Unquestionably, the Legislature intended to alleviate what it deemed a "health care liability crisis" when it enacted the Texas Medical Liability Act, Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code §§ 74.001-.507. Accordingly, I agree that claims arising in the context of the delivery of health care services are presumptively health care liability claims. But, as the Court recognizes, nothing in the Act signals an intent to shield physicians from liability for sexual assaults or similar intentional misconduct. I fear that the requirement the Court imposes, that a claimant conclusively establish that a claim is not a health care liability claim in order to rebut the Act's presumptive application, may force assault victims to submit expert reports or see their cases dismissed.
In describing the expert report requirement imposed by the Act's predecessor, we have noted on more than one occasion that claimants are not required to marshal their proof to comply with the statute. Bowie Mem'l Hosp. v. Wright, 79 S.W.3d 48, 52 (Tex. 2002); Am. Transitional Care Ctrs. of Tex., Inc. v. Palacios, 46 S.W.3d 873, 878 (Tex. 2001). The policy underlying the expert report requirement in the current Act remains unchanged; not to shield health care providers from legitimate claims, but to weed out frivolous claims at an early stage, before the parties and the courts have expended extensive resources. Scoresby v. Santillan, 346 S.W.3d 546, 554 (Tex. 2011). It makes sense not to place a heavy burden on claimants early in the process, in part, because the Act greatly restricts the discovery that is available before an expert report is filed. Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code § 74.351(s). In my view, the Court's imposition of a requirement that claimants conclusively establish that their allegations do not amount to health care liability claims is inconsistent with those considerations.
In light of the Act's purposes and its broad application, I agree that claimants must to do more than establish that their claims are plausibly, or even likely, not health care liability claims. But I would not go so far as the Court. Instead, I would hold that plaintiffs whose claims arise in the medical context are not required to provide expert reports if the record justifies a firm belief or conviction that the claims are not health care liability claims. This is essentially the same as the burden of proof required to terminate parental rights. See Santosky v. Kramer, 455 U.S. 745, 769, 102 S. Ct. 1388, 71 L. Ed. 2d 599 (1982); In re G.M., 596 S.W.2d 846, 847 (Tex. 1980). Surely a burden sufficient to protect parents' constitutional rights in raising their children should be sufficiently stringent to protect any interest medical providers might enjoy in having a cause of action alleging assault  proceed as a health care liability claim. Accordingly, I respectfully concur in the Court's judgment but disagree with the standard the Court imposes.
Debra H. Lehrmann
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: August 31, 2012

 

