  
Concur




Justice Willett, concurring in the judgment only.
I agree the trial court should take first crack at assessing whether today's noncompetition covenant "contains limitations as to time, geographical area, and scope of activity . . . that are reasonable and do not impose a greater restraint than is necessary."1  That inquiry—essentially, "Are the restrictions too restrictive?"—received scant attention below, rendering the record before us underdeveloped. The affidavit submitted by Marsh USA (Marsh) asserts that the stock-incentive plan aimed to boost goodwill by giving Cook a stake in Marsh's long-term success.2  Growing goodwill is all well and good, but the affidavit then says this: The noncompete "prevents employees from using that goodwill . . . to attract the customer to a competitor." On the surface, this seems just another way of saying the noncompete's purpose is to stifle competition, but perhaps a fuller record on remand will paint a less protectionist picture.
So I agree to remand, but I write separately to underscore this admittedly obvious point: Restrictions on employee mobility that exist only to squelch competition are per se illegal in Texas, and for good reason. Economic dynamism in the 21st century requires speed, knowledge, and innovation—imperatives that must inform judicial review of efforts to sideline skilled talent.3  Courts must critically examine noncompetes in light of our contemporary, knowledge-based economy that prizes ingenuity and intellectual talent. This much is clear: Courts cannot countenance covenants too contemptuous of competition.
* * *
Amid increasing labor fluidity, there is no shortage of debate surrounding the propriety of enforcing restrictive covenants that tie up skills, knowledge, ideas, and expertise. The fault line runs between first principles—freedom of contract versus freedom of competition—and judicial treatment of noncompetes has been, well, eclectic.4  Some jurisdictions favor freedom of contract (enforcing a noncompete because the employee signed it) and fret little about whether the company's interest is legitimate;5  other jurisdictions (most notably, California) champion freedom of competition and void virtually all noncompetes;6  Texas courts, like most, enforce "reasonable" ones necessary to protect legitimate interests.7  This multiplicity of standards across states—dubbed "fifty ways to leave your employer"8  —makes for an unsteady legal landscape, particularly for far-flung employers that operate throughout the country.
Today's case, like many before it, involves a familiar tension between company and employee, both intent on self-protection. The interest Marsh aims to protect, though, is less familiar. Marsh does not argue that the noncompete was needed here to protect costly investments in specialized training or to ensure its trade secrets or other confidential information9  do not wind up on WikiLeaks.10  Marsh speaks of safeguarding its goodwill, and that is a protectable interest. But uttering the word goodwill is not enough; magic words do not boast auto-enforceability. Marsh must demonstrate that it is not invoking goodwill to camouflage a less noble interest: escaping future competition from Cook.11 
As the trial court begins its examination, I add these two points:
First, while goodwill is a protectable interest, protectionism—going too far to protect what may be protectable—is verboten. Texas courts must probe noncompete covenants in that pro-free-market spirit. The Free Enterprise and Antitrust Act declares the public policy of Texas: "Every contract, combination, or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce is unlawful."12  The Act's paramount purpose "is to maintain and promote economic competition in trade and commerce ... and to provide the benefits of that competition to consumers in the state."13 
One obvious exception is the Covenants Not to Compete Act,14  which permits a noncompete clause, but only "to the extent it contains limitations as to time, geographical area, and scope of activity to be restrained that are reasonable and do not impose a greater restraint than is necessary to protect the goodwill or other business interest of the promisee."15  This exception is just that—an exception—with the rule favoring robust competition.
As for who decides whether limitations (1) are reasonable, (2) are more severe than necessary, and (3) relate to a legitimate business interest, the Covenants Not to Compete Act expressly vests that duty with courts.16  Judges must divine when competition becomes unfair competition and when a restraint becomes an unreasonable or unnecessarily restrictive restraint. To be sure, the standard has a certain eye-of-the-beholder flavor—a vagueness that inexorably produces the case-by-case unpredictability that haunts this area of employment law.17 
Alongside "reasonableness," the statute also requires that the agreement "not impose a greater restraint than is necessary."18  We have never squarely addressed whether the Act envisions two separate inquiries: (1) that the time/geography/scope limitations be "reasonable," and also (2) that the restraint not reach beyond that which is "necessary" to protect the company's protectable interests. The latter suggests more exacting scrutiny than mere "reasonableness." The Act separates the latter from the former with the conjunction "and," suggesting separateness, while the pre-1993 version of the Act fused the two explicitly.19  None of our cases declare whether "reasonable" and "necessary" are two separate inquiries or whether the latter is simply blended into the former. Many courts implicitly subsume everything under an overarching banner of reasonableness,20  while others treat them as separate prongs.21  Either way, it is not an issue we reach today.
So while Texas law allows limited noncompetes, it does not allow protectionism to trump individual or societal interests in a dynamic marketplace. And even assuming a company is trying to guard a bona fide business interest, Texas courts must strike down restrictions that are unreasonable or more severe than necessary.
The underpinnings of this principle long predate Texas (or America) and draw from the recognition that bustling markets best spur and reward ingenuity.22  The Lone Star State lauds economic dynamism. And while it is perhaps natural for a profit-maximizing company to bend toward collusive or monopolistic restriction,23  Texas law is hostile to such noncompetitive impulses. Nor can it be doubted that some companies try to tilt the playing field via dubious noncompete covenants, even facially unenforceable ones, knowing that even the specter of enforcement action will chill employees (and their potential employers) into preemptive capitulation.24 
Given this firm foundation, courts' broad discretion in scrutinizing noncompetes, and the Legislature's clearly stated opposition to contracts that unduly restrain competition, I would underscore that a noncompete rooted in protectionism alone is per se invalid under the Covenants Not to Compete Act and surely offends the Act's purpose of giving Texans the benefits of competition that is fierce yet also fair. Restraint of trade for its own sake is not a protectable "business interest" under Section 15.50, any more than violations of employee wage, hour, or safety laws are legitimate business interests that can be protected through a restrictive covenant.
More to the point, while "goodwill" is a bona fide business interest under the Act, it is not enough merely to mutter the word. You cannot simply buy a covenant not to compete. A court cannot uphold a noncompete on goodwill grounds absent a record that demonstrates the limitations are reasonable and as nonburdensome as possible. Every company has customer relationships and attendant goodwill it wants to cultivate by incentivizing employees to stay, but merely asserting goodwill is not enough. Marsh contends "Cook could take the customer relationships grown as a result of the stock incentive and use them to compete with Marsh,"25  but that unadorned assertion is insufficient. And even assuming the incentive spurred Cook to grow Marsh's goodwill (which strikes me as a curious and slippery proposition), does that prove too much, lest any workplace benefit—a bonus, a raise, a promotion, a better parking space—suffice to justify a noncompete because it theoretically motivates an employee to strengthen client relationships? The evidentiary record must demonstrate special circumstances beyond the bruises of ordinary competition such that, absent the covenant, Cook would possess a grossly unfair competitive advantage. And even then the restrictions imposed must be as light as possible and not restrict Cook's mobility to an extent greater than Marsh's legitimate need.
Second, naked restraints of trade are particularly onerous because, besides stifling beneficial competition, they also meddle with people's right to earn an honest living. Sixty-five years ago, we declared the right to use one's "own labor in any lawful employment . . . one of the first and highest of civil rights."26  The right to pursue a chosen occupation and career path is indeed highly cherished, but it is also highly vulnerable. For many people, their livelihood is inextricably tied to a certain pursuit of happiness, and losing this liberty should never be lightly regarded. Fittingly, courts have recognized a right to work of constitutional dimension, at least in cases where state action was alleged. Nearly a century ago, the United States Supreme Court explained that "the right to work for a living in the common occupations of the community is of the very essence of the personal freedom and opportunity that it was the purpose of the [Fourteenth] Amendment to secure."27  The Court made a similar point around that time in a case arising from Texas:
In so far as a man is deprived of the right to labor, his liberty is restricted, his capacity to earn wages and acquire property is lessened, and he is denied the protection which the law affords those who are permitted to work. Liberty means more than freedom from servitude, and the constitutional guaranty is an assurance that the citizen shall be protected in the right to use his powers of mind and body in any lawful calling.28 
Such eloquence has spanned centuries. Saint Thomas Aquinas addressed the connection between work and existence itself: "[I]t is natural to a man to love his own work (thus it is to be observed that poets love their own poems); and the reason is that we love to be and to live, and these are made manifest especially in our action."29  Ralph Waldo Emerson, typically transcendentalist, called it "the high prize of life, the crowning fortune of a man . . . to be born with a bias to some pursuit, which finds him in employment and happiness,—whether it be to make baskets, or broadswords, or canals, or statues, or songs."30  Voltaire took the utilitarian, albeit narrow, view: "[O]ur labour keeps off from us three great evils," he said, "idleness, vice, and want."31  We would be unwise not to linger where a priest, a poet, and a polemicist all miraculously agree. Where the judiciary is empowered to pass upon a subject that so viscerally affects the citizenry, it should do so with utmost care. Sometimes that care will demand a painstaking weighing of interests. In other moments, it will demand that certain constraints—those that restrict the right to work for no better reason than to erase the competition a company sought by entering the marketplace—be declared categorically void. In all cases, it requires chary judges who respect our law's rootedness in economic liberty and vitality.
This is doubly true in times of economic hardship. President Franklin Roosevelt's first inaugural address is largely remembered for the iconic phrase, "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself"32  —a potent sound bite that is often removed from the crucial context that surrounded it. The fear President Roosevelt spoke about in 1933 sprang largely from the financial crater left by the Great Crash of 1929 and the agonizing Great Depression that followed. The Depression's devastating effects prompted the new president to couple his discussion of fear with an emphasis on the salve to that fear: the importance of "[t]he joy and moral stimulation of work."33  It was the process—the act of committing oneself—that mattered. "Happiness lies not in the mere possession of money," he explained, "it lies in the joy of achievement, in the thrill of creative effort."34  The virtue of work is no less fundamental today. Companies must tread lightly when undertaking to curb that liberty. And if employers pass uncalled-for limits, we call on judges to pass upon them.
The "true beginning of the modern law"35  on post-employment restraints is Mitchel v. Reynolds,36  a 1711 English-court decision that stood as the most cited case on the subject for two-and-a-half centuries.37  While introducing the so-called "rule of reason" for evaluating such agreements—whether a legitimate economic or business purpose justified the restriction38  —Mitchel expressed concern that such agreements were subject to "great abuses . . . from masters, who are apt to give their apprentices much vexation on this account, and to use many indirect practices to procure such bonds from them, lest they should prejudice them in their custom, when they come up to set up for themselves."39  Though the contours of noncompete doctrine have changed as the American economy has changed, this astute observation merits remembering. The "vexation" feared in 1711 is no less real 300 years later. In 2011, overbroad restrictions can strain the gears of an economic engine that has propelled this country so well, and so far. In 2011, terms too severe to be enforced can also escape challenge altogether, instead acting in terrorem to freeze an untold number of employees in place rather than allowing human capital to find its highest and best use and thus augment economic and technological growth.40  This seems especially notable in today's era of dizzying technological change, when implicit lifetime tenure is obsolete and frequent job-hopping is ordinary (unless someone has been forced to sign away his or her right to compete).41 
Restrictive covenants are not costless, and even a mutually acceptable noncompete can impose a deadweight loss on broader society. Courts should not confuse a noncompete's impact on the employee with its impact on competition. A restraint maybe perfectly agreeable to both parties today but still harm consumers tomorrow. Moreover, as our economy becomes even more technologically advanced and knowledge-based (key contributors to a so-called high-velocity labor market), overreaching restrictions lock up human capital and decelerate the beneficial knowledge spillover that accrues from greater mobility. It remains the job of courts to be vigilant for practices that tend to servility, that deprive the public of desired services, and that quash rivals via forced restriction rather than forceful competition.42 
* * *
I recognize that a free market is not innately utopian, with frictionless edges that never need sanding. "If men were angels, no government would be necessary,"43  much less antitrust laws to curb monopolistic impulses. Under Texas law, we must dutifully enforce noncompetes that impose reasonable limitations that are no more restrictive than necessary in order to advance legitimate business interests. But this duty requires circumspection, lest the "Covenants Not to Compete Act" exception swallow the "Free Enterprise and Antitrust Act" rule. The latter sides with the virtues of economic liberty—the basic right to pursue what you choose, where you choose, and among whom you choose—not the vice of unduly denying skilled people the rewards of their earned success or injuring society by depriving the wider public of someone's talents and enterprise. So while free enterprise recognizes—demands, actually—that economic actors will doggedly pursue self-interest, Texas noncompete law recognizes the difference between constructive self-interest and destructive selfishness. Where a naked restraint of trade masquerades as a covenant not to compete, we must strike it down—always.
Summing up: Post-employment restrictions are restraints on trade and, as such, deserve rigorous legal scrutiny, particularly given today's pace of warp-speed economic change. Noncompetes tailored to protectable business interests have their lawful place, but they should be used sparingly and drafted narrowly. And employers must demonstrate special facts that legitimize the noncompete agreement. Squelching competition for its own sake is an interest unworthy of protection. Competition by a former employee may well rile an employer, but companies do not have free rein to, by contract, indenture an employee or dampen everyday competition that benefits Texas and Texans.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: June 24, 2011
