; Eva M. Guzman  
Concur




Justice Willett, concurring.
One of the more memorable scenes in The Lion King occurs as Mufasa and Simba sit high atop Pride Rock overlooking Mufasa's kingdom.1  In this granddaddy of all father-son moments, Mufasa shows Simba the territory he will inherit as king: "A king's time as ruler rises and falls like the sun. One day, Simba, the sun will set on my time here, and will rise with you as the new king." Simba is awestruck: "And this will all be mine?" "Everything," says Mufasa. "Everything the light touches," murmurs Simba in wonder. But then Simba spots dimness in the distance and turns to Mufasa for an explanation: "What about that shadowy place?" Mufasa replies, "That's beyond our borders. You must never go there, Simba."
In narrowly deciding that the school district's policy change did not moot the controversy in this case, the Court today rightfully stays within the borders of its authority, and I concur in full. I write separately, however, to ask, "What about that shadowy place?" The shadowy place in this case is well camouflaged by general phrases like "plaintiffs' claims" and "the constitutional challenge" in today's writings. The reality is that we know there is a live controversy, but we don't know much else. It is unclear from this record which claims are live, and consequently, what this case means for religious liberty—Texans' "natural and indefeasible right to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own conscience."2 
A brief review of the facts illustrates my concern. Cheerleaders of Kountze Independent School District (KISD) profess deeply held religious beliefs. Before every football game, they construct and display run-through banners that KISD players—the mighty Kountze Lions—tear through as they storm the field. For years, the cheerleaders have placed inspirational religious messages on the banners. The messages are often based on Bible verses:
 "A lion, which is strongest among beasts and turns not away from any."3 
"I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me."4 
"If God is for us, who can be against us?"5 
"But thanks be to God which gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ."6 
The cheerleaders' stated purpose was to express a positive, encouraging message in good sportsmanship, rather than the more fiery expressions displayed on other banners such as "Pluck the Eagles" or "Beat the Bulldogs."
In late 2012, the Freedom from Religion Foundation sought to uproot this tradition. The Foundation alleged in a letter to KISD that the cheerleaders' banners violated the Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution. The Foundation demanded that KISD "take immediate action to end the practice of displaying religious messages before school-sponsored events." KISD opted for preemptive capitulation (a common response) and promptly acceded to the Foundation's "ban the banners" dictate.
The cheerleaders sued KISD and obtained a temporary injunction preventing KISD's prohibition of the banners. The cheerleaders claimed that KISD's prohibition violated their free speech and free exercise rights under the Texas Constitution. They sought permanent relief preventing KISD from further violating those rights. For its part, KISD later concluded that the Establishment Clause did not require KISD to prohibit the banners and permitted the cheerleaders' banners subject to KISD's claimed "right to restrict the content of school banners." KISD denied, however, that it had violated the cheerleaders' free speech and free exercise rights and sought declaratory relief stating that the Establishment Clause did not require it to prohibit the cheerleaders' banners. In the parties' various motions, they vigorously debated whether the speech on the banners was the cheerleaders' private speech or KISD's speech.
That debate culminated in competing motions for summary judgment. KISD's motion repeated its request for declaratory relief on Establishment Clause grounds. The cheerleaders' motion proposed two solutions: (1) the trial court could sign a proposed order that virtually mirrored KISD's request for declaratory relief; or (2) the trial court could hold that the cheerleaders' speech is private speech uttered in a public forum. As to Option 1, the cheerleaders told the trial court that "KISD's sudden adoption of the Plaintiff's position that religious messages on the Cheerleaders' run-through banners are constitutionally permissible vindicates the Cheerleaders' rights and brings this case to an end. All that is required is an appropriate order by the Court." In their words, the cheerleaders sought "the same relief" sought by KISD. The trial court chose Option 1 and signed the proposed order, which, in relevant part, states "[n]either the Establishment Clause nor any other law prohibits the cheerleaders from using religious-themed banners at school sporting events."
Both sides won, right?7  Apparently not. News coverage following the trial  court's order was replete with the parties' conflicting views of the order. KISD's attorneys said the order affirmed that the banners contain the school's speech, while the cheerleaders' attorneys said the order affirmed that the banners contain the cheerleaders' private speech.8 
The record does not yield a conclusive answer. At the hearing on the parties' pending motions, the cheerleaders told the trial court that the signed order would be an alternative to the court having to decide whether their speech was private speech. The cheerleaders said "the order that's in front of the Court right now actually does not ultimately take sides on that question [of government-versus-private speech] but still gives us the relief we are willing to live with in order to be able to bring this case to a conclusion." The day before, however, in support of their summary-judgment motion, the cheerleaders had relied upon the text of the temporary injunction order, arguing that "[a]s the Court has already determined the messages on the Cheerleaders' banners [are] private speech[,] no additional ruling regarding the nature of the speech is necessary at this time." The temporary injunction order had indeed described the banner speech as "private religious expression." Additionally, the cheerleaders contended that "the Establishment Clause . . . is inapplicable to private speech." which, taken together with the text of the temporary injunction order, could explain the cheerleaders' understanding that the trial court's order designates the banner speech as private speech.
Bottom line: We don't know. What does the trial court's order accomplish? What claims have been preserved? What claims have been waived? In our pitched adversarial system, it is not uncommon for litigants to talk past each other, and uncertainty pervades the parties' briefs to this Court. But answers to these questions are critical for they speak to the fundamental  free speech and free exercise rights enshrined in our Constitution.
Because this is an interlocutory appeal, the Court appropriately does not address those core merits issues, rendering Mufasa's admonition that Simba "never go there" inapposite for the moment. But if this case returns to the trial court, a future appellate court, including this one, may well be required to go there. My concern is that this case may return to the trial court for a final decision only to reappear on our docket with no clarity as to what this order achieves and what claims are actually live. If that situation arises, the parties and trial court would do well to confront the shadowy place in this litigation and clarify with precision the status of this order and the cheerleaders' claims.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: January 29, 2016
Justice Guzman, concurring.

At the heart of the First Amendment lies the principle that each person should decide for himself or herself the ideas and beliefs deserving of expression, consideration, and adherence.1 
The fundamental right of every American to hold and profess individual religious beliefs is deeply rooted in our constitutional firmament and derives from the ideal of religious liberty that gave birth to our nation. In enacting the Texas Constitution, the people of this great State, "[h]umbly invoking the blessing of Almighty God," further guaranteed freedom of religious expression. See Tex. Const. Preamble & art. 1, §§ 6-8. While efforts to accommodate competing constitutional interests may necessitate reasonable limitations on each of those interests, the challenge is knowing where to draw the line. Constitutional analysis is rarely susceptible to doctrinal absolutes, but courts, guided by the words of our charters, must not shy away from defining the contours; otherwise, freedom is compromised. In this case, I agree with the Court that a justiciable controversy is presented.2  I write separately only to emphasize that, in considering the delicate balance of correlative constitutional rights, free religious expression must be afforded no less than equal respect.
The Constitutions of the United States and the State of Texas protect freedom of expression and guarantee our citizens the right to practice their own religion or no religion at all. See U.S. Const. amend. I.; Tex. Const. art. 1, §§ 6-8. Similar to the Texas Constitution, the United States Constitution assures religious freedom through a pair of complementary but potentially opposing directives: "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof." U.s. Const. Amend. I; see also Tex. Const. art. 1, §§ 6-8; HEB Ministries, Inc. v. Tex. Higher Educ. Coordinating Bd., 235 S.W.3d 627, 642 (Tex. 2007) (sections 6 and 7 of the Texas Constitution are Establishment Clause equivalents). Given the "internal tension in the First Amendment between the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause," Tilton v. Richardson, 403 U.S. 672, 677, 91 S. Ct. 2091, 29 L. Ed. 2d 790 (1971) (plurality opinion), governmental authorities attempting to navigate the fine line that can separate the two risk unduly impinging one in an effort to comply with the other, cf. Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U.S. 709, 719, 125 S. Ct. 2113, 161 L. Ed. 2d 1020 (2005)  (recognizing that these two clauses "often exert conflicting pressures"). Freedom of expression is often felled as collateral damage. Because "'there is room for play in the joints' between the Clauses," id., neither freedom of expression nor free exercise of religion should be sacrificed at the altar of uncertainty.
"First Amendment rights, applied in light of the special characteristics of the school environment, are available to teachers and students. It can hardly be argued that either students or teachers shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate." Tinker v. Des Moines Indep. Cmty. Sch. Dist., 393 U.S. 503, 506, 89 S. Ct. 733, 21 L. Ed. 2d 731 (1969). Yet, in untold situations, that is precisely what happens, and it occurs more frequently than our constitutional safeguards permit. Too often, public-school officials unduly target religious speech, at times misunderstanding Supreme Court precedent allowing them to preserve order at school, see id. at 513, or due to confusion about the religious-endorsement proscription, see Santa Fe Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Doe, 530 U.S. 290, 305-08, 120 S. Ct. 2266, 147 L. Ed. 2d 295 (2000). Examples abound:
• A third-grader in Plano Independent School District allegedly tried to give "candy cane ink pen[s]" and bookmarks discussing Jesus and "The Legend of the Candy Cane" as gifts at a school winter-break party. Morgan v. Swanson, 659 F.3d 359, 366 (5th Cir. 2011) (en banc). School officials prohibited the religious message but allowed other students to distribute nonreligious items at the party. Id. The Fifth Circuit, sitting en banc, held that "discriminating against student speech solely on the basis of religious viewpointis unconstitutional under the First Amendment." Id. at 412 (Elrod, J., writing for majority on this point).
• A second-grader in Plano allegedly tried to give classmates tickets to a religious play at a nearby church, but the principal refused to allow distribution of the tickets. Id. at 368-69 (Benavides, J., writing for majority). When the same student celebrated her "half birthday" at school, the principal prohibited her from giving pencils as gifts because the pencils read, "Jesus loves me this I know for the Bible tells me so." Id. Again, such viewpoint discrimination is unconstitutional. Id. at 412 (Elrod, J., writing for majority on this point).
• An elementary school in Katy allowed parents to purchase student artwork as "holiday cards." Pounds v. Katy Indep. Sch. Dist., 730 F. Supp. 2d 636, 639-40 (S.D. Tex. 2010). Citing Establishment Clause concerns, school officials blacked out the only card on the order form referencing a specific deity (Jesus). Id. at 639-40. The court held that including the religious card would not have violated the Establishment Clause and that the school's "admitted viewpoint discrimination violated the First Amendment." Id. at 639, 660.
• An Arizona elementary school fundraiser allowed parents to purchase personalized tiles to be affixed to the school halls. Seidman v. Paradise Valley Unified Sch. Dist. No. 69, 327 F. Supp. 2d 1098, 1102 (D. Ariz. 2004). The school allowed "'inspirational' or 'encouraging' messages from parents to their children" on the tiles. Id. at 1112. However, citing Establishment Clause concerns, it prohibited "the same type of messages presented from a religious perspective." Id.  This impermissible viewpoint discrimination violated the parents' free-speech rights. See id. at 1114-15.
• A Florida school district prohibited a fourth-grader from distributing invitations to an Easter egg hunt so her classmates could "have fun and learn the true meaning of Easter." Gilio ex rel. J.G. v. Sch. Bd. of Hillsborough Cnty., 905 F. Supp. 2d 1262, 1266-67 (M.D. Fla. 2012). The court, however, granted a preliminary injunction enjoining the school district from prohibiting the invitations to religious events "unless such restriction [would be] necessary to prevent a material and substantial interference with schoolwork or discipline." Id. at 1265.
• Though students in a Pennsylvania school district were generally allowed to distribute invitations to birthday parties, Valentine's Day dances, and Halloween parties, the district prohibited a fifth-grader from distributing invitations to a church Christmas party. K.A. ex rel. Ayers v. Pocono Mountain Sch. Dist., 710 F.3d 99, 102-03 (3d Cir. 2013). The Third Circuit affirmed a preliminary injunction prohibiting the district from stopping the distribution of religious flyers. Id. at 102-03.
A review of cases from around the country confirms these are not isolated instances of viewpoint discrimination.3 
In limited circumstances, courts have allowed school districts to curtail students' religious expression,4  but the standards for achieving constitutional compliance are not always clear. A litany of cases and an extensive body of literature on this very subject demonstrates the guidance that could enable educators to determine whether the decisions they make comply with constitutional standards is often insufficient. See Pounds, 730 F. Supp. 2d at 638  & n.1. Confusion exists about the extent to which restraints on religious expression are permissible.
The need for further guidance is exemplified by cases in which perplexed school officials have switched sides multiple times, sometimes allowing and other times disallowing the contested speech.5  This case presents yet another example of vacillating policy without genuine resolution of the underlying dispute. Quashing free expression may be the most expedient method of alleviating pressure arising from countervailing interests, but suppression must not be perpetuated as a safety valve.
Our state and federal constitutions embody a fundamental commitment to religious liberty and guarantee the freedom to express diverse thoughts without governmental interference. To adequately protect these rights, courts must not jealously guard their jurisdiction when disputes arise. "[O]ur Constitution requires vigilance lest courts overstep their jurisdictional bounds, [but] courts also must dutifully exercise jurisdiction rightly theirs." Heckman v. Williamson Cnty., 369 S.W.3d 137, 144 (Tex. 2012). A justiciable controversy exists in this case because Kountze Independent School District has not met its "formidable burden of showing that it is absolutely clear the allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur." Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Envtl. Servs. (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 190, 120 S. Ct. 693, 145 L. Ed. 2d 610 (2000). To the contrary, the school district has offered no promise of permanency, only an equivocal and conditional change of policy. See Lakey v. Taylor ex rel. Shearer, 278 S.W.3d 6, 12 (Tex. App.—Austin 2008, no pet.) ("Where a policy is challenged as unconstitutional, voluntary cessation of such policy, without an admission or judicial determination regarding its constitutionality, is not sufficient to render the constitutional challenge moot."). Because the constitutional challenge at issue in this case has not been resolved with the degree of assurance required to deprive the courts of jurisdiction over the controversy, I fully join the Court's opinion and judgment.
Eva M. Guzman
Justice
Opinion delivered: January 29, 2016

 

