; Jeffrey S. Boyd  
Concur




Justice Willett, joined by Justice Lehrmann and Justice Devine, concurring.
To understand the emotion which swelled my heart as I clasped this money, realizing that I had no master who could take it from me—that it was mine—that my hands were my own, and could earn more of the precious coin . . . . I was not only a freeman but a free-working man, and no master Hugh stood ready at the end of the week to seize my hard earnings.1 
Frederick Douglass's irrepressible joy at exercising his hard-won freedom captures just how fundamental—and transformative—economic liberty is. Self-ownership, the right to put your mind and body to productive enterprise, is not a mere luxury to be enjoyed at the sufferance of governmental grace, but is indispensable to human dignity and prosperity.2 
Texans are doubly blessed, living under two constitutions sharing a singular purpose: to secure individual freedom, the essential condition of human flourishing. In today's age of staggering civic illiteracy—when 35 percent of Americans cannot correctly name a single branch of government—it is unsurprising that people mistake majority rule as America's defining value.3  But our federal and state charters are not, contrary to popular belief, about "democracy"—a word that appears in neither document, nor in the Declaration of Independence. Our enlightened 18th- and 19th-century Founders, both federal and state, aimed higher, upended things, and brilliantly divided power to enshrine a promise (liberty), not merely a process (democracy).
One of our constitutions (federal) is short, the other (state) is long—like really long—but both underscore liberty's primacy right away. The federal Constitution, in the first sentence of the Preamble, declares its mission to "secure the Blessings of Liberty."4  The Texas Constitution likewise wastes no time, stating up front in the Bill of Rights its paramount aim to recognize and establish "the general, great and essential principles of liberty and free government."5  The point is unsubtle and undeniable: Liberty is not provided by government;  liberty preexists government. It is not a gift from the sovereign; it is our natural birthright. Fixed. Innate. Unalienable.
* * *
 Democracy is two wolves and a lamb voting on what to have for lunch. Liberty is a well-armed lamb contesting the vote.6 
This case concerns the timeless struggle between personal freedom and government power. Do Texans live under a presumption of liberty or a presumption of restraint? The Texas Constitution confers power—but even more critically, it constrains power. What are the outer-boundary limits on government actions that trample Texans' constitutional right to earn an honest living for themselves and their families? Some observers liken judges to baseball umpires, calling legal balls and strikes, but when it comes to restrictive licensing laws, just how generous is the constitutional strike zone? Must courts rubber-stamp even the most nonsensical encroachments on occupational freedom? Are the most patently farcical and protectionist restrictions nigh unchallengeable, or are there, in fact, judicially enforceable limits?
This case raises constitutional eyebrows because it asks building-block questions about constitutional architecture—about how we as Texans govern ourselves and about the relationship of the citizen to the State. This case concerns far more than whether Ashish Patel can pluck unwanted hair with a strand of thread. This case is fundamentally about the American Dream and the unalienable human right to pursue happiness without curtsying to government on bended knee. It is about whether government can connive with rent-seeking factions to ration liberty unrestrained, and whether judges must submissively uphold even the most risible encroachments.
The U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly declared that the right to pursue a lawful calling "free from unreasonable governmental interference" is guaranteed under the federal Constitution,7  and is "objectively, deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition."8  A pro-liberty presumption is also hardwired into the Texas Constitution, which declares no citizen shall be "deprived of life, liberty, property, [or] privileges or immunities"9 —phrasing that indicates citizens already possess these freedoms, and government cannot take them "except by the due course of the law of the land."10  Texans are thus presumptively free, and government must justify its deprivations. So just how nonsensically can government stifle your constitutional right to put your know-how and gumption to use in a gainful trade?
I recognize the potential benefits of licensing: protecting the public and preventing charlatanism. I also recognize the proven benefits of constitutional constraints: protecting the public and preventing collectivism. Invalidating irrational laws does not beckon a Dickensian world of run-amok frauds and pretenders. The Court's view is simple, and simply stated: Laws that impinge your constitutionally  protected right to earn an honest living must not be preposterous.
By contrast, the dissents see government power in the economic realm as infinitely elastic, and thus limited government as entirely fictive, troubling since economic freedom is no less vulnerable to majoritarian oppression than, say, religious freedom—perhaps more so. Exalting the reflexive deference championed by Progressive theorists like Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., the dissents would seemingly uphold even the most facially protectionist actions. Stranger still, the principal dissent, while conceding that our state and federal Constitutions protect economic liberty, quotes liberally from Justice Holmes, who rejected that the Fourteenth Amendment does any such thing.11 
In any event, as Justice Holmes cruelly proved, dogmatic majoritarianism can exact a ruthless price. In Buck v. Bell, the U.S. Supreme Court considered whether Carrie Buck, a Virginia teenager raped and impregnated by her foster parents' nephew, could be forcibly sterilized on grounds that she was "feeble minded."12  Speaking through Justice Holmes, the Court credulously accepted at face value the government's assertion that public welfare was a good-enough reason to forbid the "manifestly unfit from continuing their kind."13  Compulsory sterilization was preferable to waiting to "execute degenerate offspring for crime, or to let them starve for their imbecility."14  Nothing—not even coercive eugenics—trumped judicial submissiveness to whatever the majority decreed. Justice Holmes was unyielding, thundering one of the most heartless, ignominious lines in Supreme Court history: "Three generations of imbeciles are enough."15 
Justice Holmes later boasted to a friend that "[it] gave me pleasure, establishing the constitutionality of a law permitting the sterilization of imbeciles."16  Unquestioning deference necessarily meant civil  liberties were trampled, but Justice Holmes's pro-statism minced no words: "a law should be called good if it reflects the will of the dominant forces of the community even if it will take us to hell."17  In fact, said Justice Holmes, "if my fellow citizens want to go to Hell I will help them. It's my job."18 
Like the Court, I favor a less hard-hearted and more liberty-minded view for Texas, one that sees the judiciary as James Madison did when he introduced the Bill of Rights, as an "impenetrable bulwark" against imperious government.19  The Texas Constitution enshrines structural principles meant to advance individual freedom; they are not there for mere show. Our Framers opted for constitutional—that is, limited—government, meaning majorities don't possess an untrammeled right to trammel. The State would have us wield a rubber stamp rather than a gavel, but a written constitution is mere meringue if courts rotely exalt majoritarianism over constitutionalism, and thus forsake what Chief Justice Marshall called their "painful duty"—"to say, that such an act was not the law of the land."20 
To be sure, the Capitol, not this Court, is the center of policymaking gravity, and judges are lousy second-guessers of the other branches' economic judgments. Lawmakers' policy-setting power is unrivaled—but it is not unlimited. Preeminence does not equal omnipotence. Politicians decide if laws pass, but courts decide if those laws pass muster. Cases stretching back centuries treat economic liberty as constitutionally protected—we crossed that Rubicon long ago—and there is a fateful difference between active judges who defend rights and activist judges who concoct rights. If judicial review means anything, it is that judicial restraint does not allow everything. The rational-basis bar may be low, but it is not subterranean.
I support the Court's "Don't Thread on Me" approach: Threaders with no license are less menacing than government with unlimited license.
I.
This case lays bare a spirited debate raging in legal circles, one that conjures legal buzzwords and pejoratives galore: activism vs. restraint, deference vs. dereliction, adjudication vs. abdication. The rhetoric at times seems overheated, but the temperature reflects the stakes. It concerns the most elemental—if not elementary—question of American jurisprudence: the proper role of the judiciary under the Constitution.
Judicial duty requires courts to act judicially by adjudicating, not politically by legislating. So when is it proper for a court to strike down legislative or executive action as unconstitutional? There are people of goodwill on both sides, and as this case demonstrates, it seems a legal Rorschach test, where one person's "judicial engagement" is another person's "judicial  usurpation."21 
There are competing visions, to put it mildly, of the role judges should play in policing the other branches, particularly when reviewing economic regulations. On one side is the Progressive left, joined by some conservatives, who favor absolute judicial deference to majority rule. Judge Robert Bork falls into this camp. A conservative luminary, Bork is heir to a Progressive luminary, Justice Holmes, who also espoused judicial minimalism. Both men believed the foremost principle of American government was not individual liberty but majoritarianism.22  As Judge Bork put it, "majorities are entitled to rule, if they wish, simply because they are majorities."23 
The other side advocates "judicial engagement" whereby courts meaningfully enforce constitutional boundaries, lest judicial restraint become judicial surrender.24  The pro-engagement camp argues the judiciary should be less protective of Leviathan government and more protective of individual freedom. Government exists, they contend, to secure pre-existing rights, as the Declaration makes clear in its first two paragraphs.25  Thus, when it comes to judicial review of laws burdening economic freedoms, courts should engage forthrightly, and not put a heavy, pro-government thumb on the scale.
This much is clear: Spirited debates over judicial review have roiled America since the Founding, from Marbury v. Madison,26  to Worcester v. Georgia27  (against which President Jackson bellowed, "John Marshall has made his decision—now let him enforce it."28  ), to the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when Progressives opposed judicial enforcement of economic liberties, all the way to present-day battles over the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.29  In the 1920s and 1930s, liberals began backing judicial protection  of noneconomic rights, while resisting similar protection for property rights and other economic freedoms. The Progressives' preference for judicial nonintervention was later embraced by post-New Deal conservatives like Judge Bork. The judicial-review debate, both raucous and reasoned, is particularly pitched today within the broader conservative legal movement. A prominent fault line has opened on the right between traditional conservatives who champion majoritarianism and more liberty-minded theorists who believe robust judicial protection of economic rights is indispensable to limited government.30 
When it comes to regulating the economy, Holmesian deference still dominates, as seen in the Supreme Court's landmark 2012 decision upholding the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act.31  During oral argument, the Solicitor General—echoing the dissenters in today's case—admonished that striking down President Obama's signature health-care law would amount to judicial activism that would "import Lochner-style substantive due process."32  The Court, he implored, "has a solemn obligation to respect the judgments of the democratically accountable branches of government."33  A few days later, the President himself charged it would constitute raw judicial activism if the Court took the "unprecedented, extraordinary step of overturning a law that was passed by a strong majority of a democratically elected Congress,"34  adding, "We have not seen a court overturn a law that was passed by Congress on an economic issue . . . for decades"—"We're going to the '30s, pre-New Deal."35  We know how the story ended. The Court upheld the ACA on tax-power grounds, with Chief Justice Roberts famously stating, "It is not our job to protect the people from the consequences of their political choices."36 
 Today's case arises under the Texas Constitution, over which we have final interpretive authority, and nothing in its 60,000-plus words requires judges to turn a blind eye to transparent rent-seeking that bends government power to private gain, thus robbing people of their innate right—antecedent to government—to earn an honest living. Indeed, even if the Texas Due Course of Law Clause mirrored perfectly the federal Due Process Clause, that in no way binds Texas courts to cut-and-paste federal rational-basis jurisprudence that long post-dates enactment of our own constitutional provision, one more inclined to freedom.
The principal dissent claims "the rational basis standard invokes objective reason as its measure," a contention difficult to take seriously.37  Legal fictions abound in the law, but the federal "rational basis test" is something special; it is a misnomer, wrapped in an anomaly, inside a contradiction. Its measure often seems less objective reason than subjective rationalization. The dissent also says the fact that other states regulate threading provides "strong evidence that Texas' regulatory framework has a rational basis."38  In my view, what happens in the Aloha State makes not the slightest constitutional difference in the Lone Star State. Unconstitutional encroachments reach across time zones and centuries. Just this week, in a case that took almost 80 years to bring, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down as unconstitutional a New Deal-era, raisin-confiscation regime that had spanned thirteen Presidents.39 
The test adopted today bears a passing resemblance to "rational basis"-type wording, but this test is rational basis with bite, demanding actual rationality, scrutinizing the law's actual basis, and applying an actual test.40  In my view, the principal  dissent is unduly diffident, concluding the threading rules, while "excessive"41  and "obviously too much"42  are not "clearly arbitrary."43  If these rules are not arbitrary, then the definition of "arbitrary" is itself arbitrary. Without discussing (or even citing) recent federal cases striking down nonsensical licensing rules under the supine federal test,44  the dissents sever "rational" from "rational basis," loading the dice—relentlessly—in government's favor.45  Their test is tantamount to no test at all; at most it is pass/fail, and government never fails.46 
  II.  
You take my house when you do take the prop / That doth sustain my house; you take my life / When you do take the means whereby I live.47 
Government understandably wants to rid society of quacks, swindlers, and incompetents. And licensing is one of government's preferred tools, aiming to protect us from harm by credentialing certain occupations and activities. You can't practice medicine in Texas without satisfying the Board of Medical Examiners. You can't zoom down SH-130 outside Austin at 85 miles per hour (reportedly the highest speed limit in the Western Hemisphere) without a driver's license. Sensible rules undoubtedly boost our quality of life. And senseless rules undoubtedly weaken our quality of life. Governments at every level—national, state, and local—wield regulatory power, but not always with regulatory prudence, which critics say stymies innovation, raises consumer prices,48  and impedes economic opportunity with little or no concomitant public benefit.49  The academic literature has attained consensus: "a licensing restriction can only be justified where it leads to better quality professional services—and for many restrictions, proof of that enhanced quality is lacking."50 
 It merits repeating: Judicial duty does not include second-guessing everyday policy choices, however improvident. The question for judges is not whether a law is sensible but whether it is constitutional. Does state "police power"—the inherent authority to enact general-welfare legislation—ever go too far? Does a Texas Constitution inclined to limited government have anything to say about government irrationally subjugating the livelihoods of Texans?
A.
The Republic of Texas regulated just one profession: doctors.51  In 1889, the State of Texas added one more: dentists.52  Until the mid-20th century, occupational regulation in the Lone Star State was rare (aside from the post-Prohibition alcohol industry)53  and was generally limited to professions with a clear public-safety impact: nurses, pharmacists, optometrists, engineers, etc.
Since World War II, however, the economy, both nationally and here in Texas, has undergone a profound shift. States now assert licensing authority over an ever-increasing range of occupations, particularly in the fast-growing service sector, which makes up "three-quarters of gross domestic product and most job growth in the U.S."54  During the 1950s, fewer than five percent of American workers needed a state license.55  By 1970 it had doubled to 10 percent, and by 2000 had doubled again.56  In 2006, nearly one-third of U.S.  workers needed government permission to do their job.57 
This spike in licensing coincides with a decline in labor-union membership. "In fact, [occupational licensing] has eclipsed unionization as the dominant organizing force of the U.S. labor market."58  Twice as many workers today are covered by licensing as by labor contracts.59  Moreover, the pervasiveness of licensing seems unrelated to whether a state is labeled "red" or "blue" politically. Occupational regulation seems wholly disconnected from party-specific ideology. In addition, most economic regulations are enacted not by legislatures answerable to voters but by administrative bodies, often with scant oversight by elected officials.
The Lone Star State is not immune from licensure proliferation. An ever-growing number of Texans must convince government of their fitness to ply their trade, spurring the House Committee on Government Efficiency and Reform in 2013 to lament the kudzu-like spread of licensure: "The proliferation of occupational licensing by the State of Texas can be to the detriment of the very consumer the licensing is professing to protect."60  Today the number of regulated occupations exceeds 50061 —about 2.7 million individuals and businesses,62  roughly one-third of the Texas workforce,63  higher than the national average64 —with many restrictions backed by heavy fines and even jail time. Importantly, these statistics reflect state-only regulations; local and federal rules raise the number of must-be-licensed workers higher still.65 
Unlike some states, Texas doesn't yet require florists,66  interior designers,67  horse massagers,68  ferret breeders,69  or  fortune tellers70  to get state approval (though the soothsayers would presumably see it coming). But the Lone Star State does require state approval to be a shampoo apprentice.71  And to be an in-person auctioneer72  (though not to be an internet auctioneer). And while you don't need a license to be a bingo caller in Texas, you must be listed on the Registry of Approved Bingo Workers in order to yell out numbers and letters.73 
The "sum of good government," Thomas Jefferson said in his first inaugural, was one "which shall restrain men from injuring one another"—indisputably true—but "shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvements."74  Without question, many licensure rules are justified by legitimate public health and safety concerns. And isolating the point at which a rule becomes unconstitutionally "irrational" eludes mathematical precision. But it is no more imprecise as when judges ascertain under the Constitution when a search is "unreasonable"75  or bail "excessive"76  or cause "probable"77  or punishment "cruel and unusual."78  Degree of difficulty aside, judges exist to be judgmental, hence the title.
The Texas Constitution has something to say when barriers to occupational freedom are absurd or have less to do with fencing out incompetents than with fencing in incumbents. As Nobel economist Milton Friedman observed, "the justification" for licensing is always to protect the public, but "the reason" for licensing is shown by observing who pushes for it—usually those representing not consumers but vested, already-licensed practitioners.79  In other words, government's coercive power is often wielded to quash newcomers. As two federal appellate judges provocatively put it, "The practical effect of rational basis review of economic regulation is the absence of any check on the group interests that all too often control the democratic process. It allows the legislature free reign to subjugate the common good and individual liberty to the electoral calculus of politicians, the whims of majorities, or the self-interest of factions."80  Summarizing: "Rational basis review means property is at the mercy of the pillagers.  The constitutional guarantee of liberty deserves more respect—a lot more."81 
Indeed, some fret that the focus of occupational regulation has morphed from protecting the public from unqualified providers to protecting practitioners from unwanted competition. Courts are increasingly asking whether societal benefits are being subordinated to the financial benefits of those lucky enough to be licensed. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit recently buried the so-called "casket cartel" in Louisiana, siding 3-0 with a group of woodworking Benedictine monks who supported their monastery by selling handcrafted pine coffins. State-licensed funeral directors found the competition unwelcome, and the monks were threatened with a fine and jail time for breaching Louisiana law that said only state-licensed funeral directors could sell "funeral merchandise." In striking down the anticompetitive law, the Fifth Circuit explained: "The great deference due state economic regulation does not demand judicial blindness to the history of a challenged rule or to the context of its adoption nor does it require courts to accept nonsensical explanations for regulation."82  While acknowledging that Williamson v. Lee Optical83 —the Supreme Court's authoritative treatment of rational-basis scrutiny—dictates deference to state policymakers, the Fifth Circuit underscored that "Williamson insists upon a rational basis," adding, "a hypothetical rationale, even post hoc, cannot be fantasy" or impervious to "evidence of irrationality."84 
A similar casket-cartel law was invalidated in 2002 by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, the first federal appellate court since the New Deal to invalidate an economic regulation for offending economic liberties secured by the Fourteenth Amendment.85  The court found no sensible  connection between the onerous licensing requirements and the law's alleged "health and safety" purpose. The court rejected the state's predictable cries of "Lochnerism" and said the alleged bases for the law came close to "striking us with 'the force of a five-week-old, unrefrigerated dead fish.'"86  The Sixth Circuit concluded it was ludicrous to see the law as anything but "an attempt to prevent economic competition,"87  and that "protecting a discrete interest group from economic competition is not a legitimate governmental purpose."88  Granting special economic favors to preferred interests may be a common government purpose—"the favored pastime of state and local governments," as the Tenth Circuit put it89 —but common doesn't mean constitutional. Merely asserting—and accepting—"Because government says so" is incompatible with individual freedom. Courts need not be contortionists, ignoring obvious absurdities to contrive imaginary justifications for laws designed to favor politically connected citizens at the expense of others.
More and more, courts—even comedians90 —are scrutinizing the entry barriers imposed by occupational regulations. Earlier this year, a federal district court in Austin rejected the state's attempt to force a teacher of African hair braiding to meet state barber-school regulations.91  Isis Brantley was vexed as to why her Institute of Ancestral Braiding needed a 2,000-square foot facility, 10 barber chairs, and 5 sinks to teach people how to twist and braid hair.92  The court examined means and ends and agreed the requirements were senseless.93  Why require sinks, for example, when braiders don't wash hair, and state law allows braiders to use just hand sanitizer?94  The court refused to accept blindly the state's purported justifications. It conducted an actual judicial inquiry and observed the state was trying to "shoehorn two unlike professions 'into a  single, identical mold, by treating hair braiders—who perform a very distinct set of services—as if they were [barbers].'"95  The court stressed "the logical disconnect inherent in the scheme which contemplates the existence of hair-braiding schools but makes it prohibitively difficult for a hair-braiding school to enter the market."96  The court concluded the rules lacked any "rational relationship to any legitimate government interest"97  and were thus unconstitutional under the Fourteenth Amendment.98 
Tellingly, the state declined to appeal, saying it would instead launch "a comprehensive review of the barber and cosmetology statutes" and "work with [the] legislative oversight committees on proposals to remove unnecessary regulatory burdens for Texas businesses and entrepreneurs."99  Legislative response was swift—and unanimous—and Governor Abbott 15 days ago signed House Bill 2717 to deregulate hair braiding.100  But as with many matters (e.g., public school finance), it took a judicial ruling on constitutionality to spark legislative action.
The U.S Supreme Court itself recently examined how states regulate professions, scrutinizing whether licensing boards dominated by industry incumbents are rightly focused on weeding out scammers and inept practitioners or wrongly focused on weeding out newcomers.101  Earlier this year in North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. FTC,102  the High Court held that a state dental board controlled by "active market participants" could be sued under federal antitrust law for cracking down on non-dentists who were offering teeth-whitening treatments.103  The decision brought a smile to licensure critics who had long argued that self-regulation invites self-dealing and that state licensing boards prone to regulatory capture deserved no immunity for Sherman Act104  abuses. Ever since Parker v. Brown 80-plus years ago,105  such boards were deemed outside the Act's ban on cartels because, unlike traditional cartels, they were sanctioned by the state.106  No  more. Parker no longer insulates regulated regulators regulating to anticompetitive effect. Licensing boards comprised of private competitors will face Sherman Act liability if they flex power to smother aspiring entrepreneurs.107 
B.
As today's case shows, the Texas occupational licensure regime, predominantly impeding Texans of modest means, can seem a hodge-podge of disjointed, logic-defying irrationalities, where the burdens imposed seem almost farcical, forcing many lower-income Texans to face a choice: submit to illogical bureaucracy or operate an illegal business? Licensure absurdities become apparent when you compare the wildly disparate education/experience burdens visited on various professions. The disconnect between the strictness of some licensing rules and their alleged public-welfare rationale is patently bizarre:
Emergency Medical Technicians. EMTs are entrusted with life-and-death decisions. But in Texas, entry-level EMTs need only 140 hours of training before rendering life-saving aid.108  Contrast that with the radically more onerous education/experience requirements for barbers (300 hours),109  massage therapists (500 hours),110  manicurists (600 hours),111  estheticians (750 hours),112  and full-service cosmetologists (1,500 hours).113 
Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers. Of the number of states and the District of Columbia that require licenses for backflow prevention assembly testers, the Lone Star State is the only place where it takes more than two weeks of training/experience—way more. Fifty times more. Not two weeks but two years.114 
State licensing impacts our lives from head to toe. Literally. Starting at the  top, where does hair end and the beard begin? Texas law has been quite finicky on the matter, leading Texas barbers and cosmetologists to spend years splitting legal hairs and clogging Texas courts. Both of these state-licensed professionals may cut hair, but until 2013 only barbers, not cosmetologists, had state permission to wield a razor blade to shave facial hair. Before 2013, if you wanted your beard shaved, you had to visit a barber (probably a man) and not a cosmetologist (probably a woman).115  And what is a "beard" anyway? Why, it's the facial hair below the "line of demarcation" as defined in the Administrative Code.116  Even the Attorney General of Texas got all shook up wondering whether Elvis's famous sideburns "were hair which a cosmetologist might trim, or a partial beard which could be serviced only [by] a barber."117 
At the other bodily extreme, what's the demarcation between the foot (which podiatrists can treat) and the ankle (which they can't)? These are high-stakes disputes, and sometimes the licensing bodies have jurisdictional spats with each other, usually over "scope of practice" issues. So where does the foot end and the ankle begin? In 2010, this Court ended a nearly ten-year legal battle between, in one corner, the Texas Medical Association and Texas Orthopedic Association, and in the other, the Texas State Board of Podiatric Medical Examiners and Texas Podiatric Medical Association.118 
According to the academic literature, the real-world effects of steroidal regulation are everywhere: increased consumer cost; decreased consumer choice; increased practitioner income; decreased practitioner mobility119 —plus shrunken economic prospects for lower income, would-be entrepreneurs.120  Thomas Edison, with little formal schooling, likely could not be a licensed engineer today, nor could Frank Lloyd Wright be a licensed architect.121 
  III.  
No man is allowed to be a judge in his own cause, because his interest would certainly bias his judgment, and, not improbably, corrupt his integrity.122 
Anyone acquainted with human nature understands, as Madison did, that when people, or branches of government, are free to judge their own actions, nothing is prohibited. The Court recognizes that Texans possess a basic liberty under Article I, Section 19 to earn a living. And to safeguard that guarantee, the Court adopts a test allergic to nonsensical government encroachment. I prefer authentic judicial scrutiny to a rubber-stamp exercise that stacks the legal deck in government's favor.
My views are simply stated:
1. The economic-liberty test under Article I, Section 19 of the Texas Constitution is more searching than the minimalist test under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Even under the lenient rational-basis test—"the most deferential of the standards of review"123 —the would-be threaders should win this case. It is hard to imagine anything more irrational than forcing people to spend thousands of dollars and hundreds of hours on classes that teach everything they don't do but nothing they actually do. Not one of the 750 required hours of cosmetology covers eyebrow threading. Government-mandated barriers to employment should actually bear some meaningful relationship to reality.
It is instructive to consider the U.S. Supreme Court's first occupational licensing case, from 1889. In Dent v. West Virginia124 —which has never been overruled and is still cited approvingly125 —the Court upheld a physician-licensing regime, calling it a way to protect "the general welfare of [the] people" and "secure them against the consequences of ignorance and incapacity, as well as of deception and fraud."126  But the Court cautioned that constitutional limits exist. Government is free to mandate requirements "appropriate to the calling or profession," but not those that "have no relation to such calling or  profession."127  Why? Because that would "deprive one of his right to pursue a lawful vocation."128  Restrictions must have a reasonable connection to the person's fitness or capacity. That explains the High Court's 1957 ruling in Schware v. Board of Bar Examiners,129  the only time the Court has struck down a licensing restriction under rational-basis review. In Schware, the Court invalidated New Mexico's attempt to bar a Communist Party member from practicing law: "any qualification must have a rational connection with the applicant's fitness or capacity to practice."130 
The federal rational-basis requirement debuted amid Depression-era upheaval in 1934, when the Court in Nebbia v. New York,131  criminalizing the sale of milk below the government-approved price, held "a State is free to adopt whatever economic policy may reasonably be deemed to promote public welfare,"132  so long as it is not "unreasonable or arbitrary."133  Nebbia was a constitutional bombshell, and its abandonment of strong judicial protection for economic liberty presaged a vast expansion of government power. Twenty years later came the Court's authoritative guidance on Fourteenth Amendment review of economic regulation: Williamson v. Lee Optical.134  In Lee Optical, the Court, while implicitly recognizing a liberty right to pursue one's chosen occupation, held that economic regulation—here, forbidding opticians from putting old lenses in new frames—would be upheld if the court could conjure out of thin air any hypothetical reason why lawmakers might have enacted the law.135  Uncertainty has persisted for decades, partly because, as the Court acknowledges, "Our cases have not elaborated on the standards for determining what constitutes a 'legitimate government interest.'"136  Some federal circuits, including the Fifth, have held it is improper to regulate solely to insulate incumbent business from competition.137  But with a few notable exceptions, like the  recent "casket cartel"138  and African hair-braiding cases,139  rational-basis review under the Fourteenth Amendment is largely a judicial shrug.
Indeed, federal-style scrutiny is quite unscrutinizing, with many burdens acing the rational-basis test while flunking the straight-face test. As the U.S. Supreme Court held almost 80 years ago in United States v. Carolene Products,140  government has no obligation to produce evidence to sustain the rationality of its action; rather, "the existence of facts supporting the legislative judgment is to be presumed."141  Courts "never require a legislature to articulate its reasons for enacting a statute" and will uphold a law "if there is any reasonably conceivable state of facts that could provide a rational basis" for it.142  Indeed, it is "entirely irrelevant" whether the purported justification for a burdensome law "actually motivated the legislature."143  Challengers must negate every conceivable basis that might support it,144  and judges are exhorted to invent a colorable justification if the one articulated by the government falls short. All this explains why critics charge the test is less "rational basis" than "rationalize a basis."
The dissents would subordinate concrete scrutiny to conjectural scrutiny that grants a nigh-irrebuttable presumption of constitutionality. It is elastic review where any conceivable, theoretical, imaginary justification suffices. In my view, Texas judges should instead conduct a genuine search for truth—as they do routinely in countless other constitutional areas—asking "What is government actually up to?" When constitutional rights are imperiled, Texans deserve actual scrutiny of actual assertions with actual evidence.
• Should Texas courts reflexively accept disingenuous or smokescreen explanations for the government's actions? No.
• Is government allowed to prevail with purely illusory or pretextual justifications for a challenged law? No.
• Must citizens negate even purely hypothetical justifications for the government's infringement of liberty? No.
• Are Texas courts obliged to jettison their truth-seeking duty of neutrality and help government contrive post hoc justifications? No.
Texas judges should discern whether government is seeking a constitutionally valid end using constitutionally permissible means. And they should do so based on real-world facts and without helping government invent after-the-fact rationalizations. I believe the Texas Constitution requires an earnest search for truth, not the turn-a-blind-eye approach that prevails under the federal Constitution.145 
  2. The Texas Constitution narrows the difference in judicial protection given to "fundamental" rights (like speech or religion) and so-called "non-fundamental" rights (like the right to earn a living).
The jurisprudential fact of the matter is that courts are more protective of some constitutional guarantees than others. One bedrock feature of 20th-century jurisprudence, starting with the U.S. Supreme Court's New Deal-era decisions, was to relegate economic rights to a more junior-varsity echelon of constitutional protection than "fundamental" rights. Nothing in the federal or Texas Constitutions requires treating certain rights as "fundamental" and devaluing others as "non-fundamental" and applying different levels of judicial scrutiny, but it is what it is: Economic liberty gets less constitutional protection than other constitutional rights.
This is not opinion but irrefutable, demonstrable fact. Ever since what is universally known as "the most famous footnote in constitutional law"146 —footnote four in Carolene Products in 1938147 —the U.S. Supreme Court has applied varying tiers of scrutiny to constitutional challenges. Simplified, the Court divides constitutional rights into two discrete categories: fundamental and non-fundamental. Upshot: Your favored First Amendment speech rights receive stronger judicial protection than your disfavored Fifth Amendment property rights. The fragmentation is less logical than rhetorical, and is anchored less in principle than in power. Under the post-New Deal picking and choosing, speech gets preferred status while economic liberty is treated as "a poor relation"148 —despite the Due Process Clause's explicit inclusion of "property" (and given the High Court's nullification of the Privilege or Immunities Clause in Slaughter-House). Speech rights get no-nonsense "strict scrutiny" to ensure government is behaving itself while property rights get servile, pro-government treatment.
For example, when courts decide an Establishment Clause challenge under the First Amendment, they normally defer to a State's asserted secular purpose. But such deference is not blind. Courts don't simply take government's word for it; they are careful to ensure that a "statement of such purpose be sincere and not a sham."149  Same with gender classifications. The Court in 1996 struck down Virginia's exclusion of women from Virginia Military Institute, explaining that government's asserted justification must be "genuine," as opposed to one that's been "hypothesized or invented post hoc in response to litigation."150 
Digital privacy under the Fourth Amendment is another constitutional area  where the U.S. Supreme Court requires real-world evidence rather than putting a pro-government thumb on the scale. Recently, in the landmark case Riley v. California,151  prosecutors, citing concerns for officer safety and preserving evidence, insisted they did not need a warrant before searching an arrested suspect's smartphone. The Court unanimously rejected the prosecutors' excuses, making clear that justifications for burdening constitutional rights must be concrete, non-imaginary concerns "based on actual experience."152  The Court held there was no real and documented evidence that warrantless searches were necessary to protect officers.153  As for evidence destruction, the Court was likewise unmoved, noting again the absence of actual evidence to back the State's assertion, adding that in any event, law enforcement has "more targeted ways to address those concerns."154 
Some constitutional rights fall somewhere in between, like "commercial speech," not because the Constitution draws that distinction but because judges do. Commercial speech—advertisements and other business-related speech—is a hybrid under U.S. Supreme Court precedent, involving speech rights (protected vigorously) and economic rights (protected not so vigorously).155  Imagine a law that makes it illegal to advertise Axe Body Spray because lawmakers believe it endangers the public. This law plainly burdens speech, but it burdens economic speech, which receives less judicial protection than, say, political speech.156  Nonetheless, commercial speech restrictions still get meaningful judicial review. Courts would examine three factors: (1) whether government has a "substantial interest" in burdening the speech; (2) whether the restriction actually furthers that interest; and (3) whether there are less restrictive ways to achieve the stated goal so that speech is restricted as little as necessary.157  Government bears the burden of proof, and the law receives a serious judicial pat-down, including whether it was honestly driven by a desire to serve public interests or was merely a pretext to serve private interests. Now imagine a different law, one banning the sale of Axe Body Spray. With this law, the legal deck is shuffled differently, and a judge would apply a less-rigorous test because the law targets not commercial speech but commercial activity, a so-called non-fundamental right. Because this law focuses on economic activity, government wouldn't have to prove its health claims, or show that less restrictive means were available, or convince a judge that the law's purported purpose was a pretext to mask its true purpose.158 
 But "economic" and "noneconomic" rights indisputably overlap. As the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized, freedom of speech would be meaningless if government banned bloggers from owning computers. Economic freedom is indispensable to enjoying other freedoms—for example, buying a Facebook ad to boost your political campaign. A decade (and three days) ago in Kelo v. City of New London,159  the landmark takings case that prompted a massive national backlash,160  Justice Thomas's dissent lamented the bias against economic rights this way: "Something has gone seriously awry with this Court's interpretation of the Constitution. Though citizens are safe from the government in their homes, the homes themselves are not."161 
Kelo is indeed illustrative, as the rational-basis test applies in eminent-domain cases, too, notwithstanding the assurance in footnote four of Carolene Products that alleged violations of the Bill of Rights deserve heightened scrutiny. Even though the Fifth Amendment explicitly protects property, the U.S. Supreme Court has supplanted the Carolene Products bifurcation with rational-basis deference in takings cases. The Kelo Court stressed its "longstanding policy of deference to legislative judgments,"162  and its unwillingness to "second-guess"163  the city's determination as to "what public needs justify the use of the takings power."164  Justice O'Connor's scathing dissent, her final opinion on the Court, forcefully accused her colleagues of shirking their constitutional duty.165 
A few years later in District of Columbia v. Heller,166  which struck down D.C.'s ban on handguns and operable long guns, the Court divided on what measure of deference was appropriate in the Second Amendment context. In dissent, Justice Stevens lauded New Deal-era Justice Frankfurter and accused the Court of aggressive activism, chastising, "adherence to a policy of judicial restraint would be far wiser than the bold decision announced today."167 
 I would not have Texas judges condone government's dreamed-up justifications (or dream up post hoc justifications themselves) for interfering with citizens' constitutional guarantees. As in other constitutional settings, we should be neutral arbiters, not bend-over-backwards advocates for the government. Texas judges weighing state constitutional challenges should scrutinize government's actual justifications for a law—what policymakers really had in mind at the time, not something they dreamed up after litigation erupted. And judges should not be obliged to concoct speculative or far-fetched rationalizations to save the government's case.
3. Texas courts need not turn a blind eye to the self-evident reasons why an increasing number of Texans need a government permission slip to work in their chosen field.
Today's decision recognizes another key contributor to the irrationalities afflicting occupational licensing: the hard-wired inclination to reduce competition. This metabolic impulse—Human Nature 101—has always existed.
English courts protected the right to earn a living since the early Seventeenth Century, long before the U.S. Constitution was adopted. In 1614, the Court of King's Bench invalidated a law that required an apprenticeship with the local guild before someone could become an upholsterer, dismissing the cries of licensed upholsterers who warned of inexpert practitioners. Lord Chief Justice Coke, Britain's highest judicial officer, was unpersuaded, holding "no skill" was required, "for [someone] may well learn this in seven hours."168  Lord Coke wrote that Magna Carta (now 800 years old) and English common law safeguarded the right of "any man to use any trade thereby to maintain himself and his family."169  He compared the proponents of barriers, invariably incumbent businesses, to someone rowing a boat: "they look one way and row another: they pretend public profit, intend private."170  That is, they speak of public welfare (increasing competence) but seek private welfare (decreasing competition). Guilds in England wielded licensing to create "artificial scarcity," prompting English courts to declare the right to earn a living one of "nationalistic concern for increasing the wealth of the realm."171  Lord Coke said legal redress, not licensing, was preferred for most occupations, explaining the "possibility that a practitioner might do a bad job was not a good excuse for restricting economic freedom, raising costs to consumers, and depriving entrepreneurs of economic opportunity."172 
Adam Smith echoed Coke a century and a half later in The Wealth of Nations, calling efforts to thwart people from exercising their dexterity and industry as they wish "a plain violation of this most sacred property."173  Economic freedom was indeed prized in the colonies, which lacked a guild system, but the right was extolled less as a national wealth creator and more as man's natural birthright. In 1775, Thomas Jefferson previewed a principle he  would underscore in the Declaration—the right to pursue happiness174 —lamenting British laws that "prohibit us from manufacturing, for our own use, the articles we raise on our own lands, with our own labour."175  Like what? Colonists were forbidden from making iron tools. Why? To enrich British toolmakers. Colonists were forbidden from making their own hats from the fur of American animals. Why? To enrich British hatmakers. Adam Smith, who considered economic choice "the most sacred and inviolable of rights," likewise observed the tendency of trades to raise wages by reducing the supply of skilled craftsmen.176 
What is past is indeed prologue.177  Fast forward almost 250 years, and a prized taxi medallion in New York City now costs $1.25 million, quadruple the price of just a decade ago.178  But the unalienable right to pursue happiness is not merely the right to possess things or to participate in activities we enjoy; it necessarily includes the right to improve our lot in life through industry and ingenuity.
A raft of modern research by Nobel Prize-winning economist Gary Becker and various social scientists confirms that practitioners desire to stifle would-be competitors.179  In 2013, the Texas House Committee on Government Efficiency and Reform found this anticompetitive impulse alive and well in Texas, where licensure affords "clear advantages to members of the licensed profession, such as reduced competition and increased earnings."180  The Committee observed that stiffer occupational regulations rarely originate with consumer and consumer advocacy groups; rather, they are pushed by entrenched industry members to secure "less competition, improved job security, and greater profitability."181  The Committee, recognizing the myriad harms of occupational overregulation—measured in damage to "job growth and consumer choice"182 —and fearing that Texas was headed towards "more, large-scale occupational licensing programs,"183  made this recommendation: "The Legislature should implement a process to review proposals to regulate new occupations, as well as existing licensing programs, based on real and documented harm to the public."184 
The Legislature responded by passing House Bill 86, which creates a mechanism to critically examine whether existing occupational regulations are still needed, and  to phase out those deemed unnecessary. Specifically, the new law requires the Sunset Advisory Commission, in assessing "an agency that licenses an occupation or profession," to probe whether, and how, existing occupational regulations actually serve the public interest.185  The new law also allows a legislator to submit to the Commission for review and analysis any proposed legislation that would create a new or significantly modify an existing occupational licensing program.186 
Courts need not be oblivious to the iron political and economic truth that the regulatory environment is littered with rent-seeking by special-interest factions who crave the exclusive, state-protected right to pursue their careers. Again, smart regulations are indispensable, but nonsensical regulations inflict multiple burdens—on consumers (who pay more for goods and services, or try to do the work themselves),187  on would-be entrepreneurs (who find market entry formidable, if not impossible), on lower-income workers (who can't break into entry-level trades), and on the wider public (who endure crimped economic growth while enjoying no tangible benefit whatsoever).188 
IV.  
In Europe, charters of liberty have been granted by power. America has set the example . . . of charters of power granted by liberty.189 
The Founders pledged their lives, fortunes, and sacred honors to birth a new  type of nation—one with a radical design: three separate, co-equal, and competing branches. Three rival branches deriving power from three unrivaled words: "We the People." Both the Texas and federal Constitutions presume the branches will be structural adversaries—that legislators, for example, will jealously guard their lawmaking prerogative if the executive begins aggrandizing power. Indeed, inter-branch political competition is a precondition to advancing inter-firm economic competition—that is, the judicial branch asserting judicial power to ensure that the political branches don't arbitrarily insulate established practitioners from newcomers.
Madison, lead architect of the U.S. Constitution, saw his bedrock constitutional mission as ensuring that America does not "convert a limited into an unlimited Govt."190  Enlightenment philosopher Montesquieu likewise warned of power concentrated: "When the legislative and executive powers are united in the same person, or in the same body of magistrates, there can be no liberty."191  Madison paid homage to "the celebrated Montesquieu" in Federalist 10, which gave voice to Madison's gravest worry: the risk of runaway majorities trampling individual liberty.192  Madison turned 85 on the day delegates adopted the Constitution of the Republic of Texas. "He lived barely 100 days more, just long enough to see Texas free."193  And just like Madison's handiwork, the Texas Constitution—then and today—exists to secure liberty.
A.
As mentioned earlier, the term "judicial activism" is a legal Rorschach test. I oppose judicial activism, inventing rights not rooted in the law. But the opposite extreme, judicial passivism, is corrosive, too—judges who, while not activist, are not active in preserving the liberties, and the limits, our Framers actually enshrined. The Texas Constitution is irrefutably framed in proscription, imposing unsubtle and unmistakable limits on government power. It models the federal Constitution in a fundamental way: dividing government power so that each branch checks and balances the others. But as we recently observed, "the Texas Constitution takes Madison a step further by including, unlike the federal Constitution, an explicit Separation of Powers provision to curb overreaching and to spur rival branches to guard their prerogatives."194  The Texas Constitution constrains government power in another distinctive way: It lacks a Necessary and Proper Clause, often invoked to expand Congress's powers beyond those specifically enumerated.195  Moreover, as noted above, it contains a Privileges or Immunities Clause that, unlike the federal version, has never been judicially nullified.196 
 As judges, we have no business second-guessing policy choices, but when the Constitution is at stake, it is not impolite to say "no" to government. Liberties for "We the People" necessarily mean limits on "We the Government." That's the very reason constitutions are written: to stop government abuses, not to ratify them. Our supreme duty to our dual constitutions and to their shared purpose—to "secure the Blessings of Liberty"197 —requires us to check constitutionally verboten actions, not rubber-stamp them under the banner of majoritarianism. For people to live their lives as they see fit, a government of limited powers must exercise that power not with force but with reason. And an independent judiciary must judge government actions, not merely rationalize them. Judicial restraint doesn't require courts to ignore the nonrestraint of the other branches, not when their actions imperil the constitutional liberties of people increasingly hamstrung in their enjoyment of "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness."198 
The power to "protect the public" is a heady and fearsome one.199  Government is charged with promoting the general welfare, but it must always act within constitutional constraints. Our two constitutions exist to advance two purposes: individual liberty through limited government. Our federal and state Founders saw liberty as America's natural, foundational value, and our rights as too numerous to be exhaustively listed. Liberty both justifies government (to erect basic civic guardrails) and limits government (to minimize abridgements on human freedom). In other words, our dual constitutional charters exist not to exalt majority rule but to protect prepolitical rights that limit majority rule. Majoritarianism cannot be permitted to invert our bottom-line constitutional premise. The might of the majority, whatever the vote count, cannot trample individuals' rights recognized in both our federal and state Constitutions, not to mention in our nation's first law, the Declaration.200 
B.  
Our State Constitution, like Madison's Federal handiwork, is infused with Newtonian genius: three rival branches locked in synchronous orbit by competing interests—ambition checking ambition.201 
 Isaac Newton died in 1727, before James Madison, the Father of the U.S. Constitution, was even born, but our Founders, both state and federal, understood political physics: "power seized by one branch necessarily means power ceded by another."202  Newton's Third Law of Motion, while a physical law, also operates as a political law. When one branch of government exerts a force, there occurs an equal and opposite counterforce. The Laws of Constitutional Motion require these rival branches to stay within their sphere, flexing competing forces so that power is neither seized nor ceded.
Our Framers understood that government was inclined to advance its own interests, even to the point of ham-fisted bullying, which is precisely why the Constitution was written—to keep government on a leash, not We the People. But individual liberty pays the price when our ingenious system of checks and balances sputters, including when the judiciary subordinates liberty to the congeries of group interests that dictate majoritarian outcomes. Daily and undeniably, there exist government incursions that siphon what Thomas Jefferson called our "due degree of liberty"203 —"siphoning that often occurs subtly, with such drop-by-drop gentleness as to be imperceptible."204 
Police power is undoubtedly an attribute of state sovereignty, but sovereignty ultimately resides in "the people of the State of Texas."205  The Texas Constitution limits government encroachments, and does so on purpose. "Our Bill of Rights is not mere hortatory fluff; it is a purposeful check on government power."206  And everyday Texans, and the courts that serve them, must remain vigilant. Government will always insist it is acting for the public's greater good, but as Justice Brandeis warned in his now-celebrated Olmstead dissent: "Experience should teach us to be most on our guard to protect liberty when the government's purposes are beneficent."207 
Before solving a problem, you must first define it. The Lone Star State boasts a spirit of daring and rugged independence, virtues essential to personal and economic  dynamism, but bureaucratic headwinds imperil that vitality. Almost two centuries ago, around the time of Texas independence, Alexis de Tocqueville, a keen observer of early America, warned of "soft despotism" wrought by government that "covers the surface of society with a network of small complicated rules" that "even the most original and energetic characters cannot penetrate."208  Tocqueville's warnings for 1835 America apply equally to 2015 Texas, where "administrative despotism," though doubtless well meaning, inflicts a real-world toll on honest, hardworking Texans:
The will of man is not shattered, but softened, bent, and guided; men are seldom forced by it to act, but they are constantly restrained from acting. Such a power does not destroy, but it prevents existence; it does not tyrannize, but it compresses, enervates, extinguishes, and stupefies a people, till each nation is reduced to nothing better than a flock of timid and industrious animals, of which government is the shepherd.209 
Government's conception of its own power as limitless is hard-wired. But under the Texas Constitution, government may only pursue constitutionally permissible ends. Naked economic protectionism, strangling hopes and dreams with bureaucratic red tape, is not one of them. And such barriers, often stemming from interest-group politics, are often insurmountable for Texans on the lower rungs of the economic ladder (who unsurprisingly lack political power)—not to mention the harm inflicted on consumers deprived of the fruits of industrious entrepreneurs. Irrational licensing laws oppress hard-working Texans of modest means, men and women struggling to do what Texans of all generations have done: to better their families through honest enterprise.210 
V.  
[W]hile baseball may be the national pastime of the citizenry, dishing out special economic benefits to certain in-state industries remains the favored pastime of state and local governments.211 
Governments are "instituted among Men" to "secure" preexisting, "unalienable Rights."212  Our federal and Texas Constitutions are charters of liberty, not wellsprings of boundless government power. Madison adroitly divided political power because he prized a "We the People" system that extolled citizens over a monarchical system of rulers and subjects. The trick was to give government its requisite powers while structurally hemming in that power so that fallible men wouldn't become as despotic as the hereditary monarchs they had fled and fought.
Economic liberty is "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition,"213  and the right to engage in productive enterprise is as central to individual freedom as  the right to worship as one chooses. Indeed, Madison declared that "protection" of citizens' "faculties of acquiring property" is the "first object of government,"214  and admonished that a government whose "arbitrary restrictions" deny citizens "free use of their faculties, and free choice of their occupations" was "not a just government."215  When it comes to occupational licensing—often less about protecting the public than about bestowing special privileges on political favorites—government power has expanded unchecked. But government doesn't get to determine the reach of its own power, something that subverts the original constitutional design of limited government. The Texas Constitution imposes limits, and imposes them intentionally.216  Bottom line: Police power cannot go unpoliced.
I believe judicial passivity is incompatible with individual liberty and constitutionally limited government. Occupational freedom, the right to earn a living as one chooses, is a nontrivial constitutional right entitled to nontrivial judicial protection. People are owed liberty by virtue of their very humanity—"endowed by their Creator," as the Declaration affirms.217  And while government has undeniable authority to regulate economic activities to protect the public against fraud and danger, freedom should be the general rule, and restraint the exception.
The Founders understood that a "limited Constitution" can be preserved "no other way than through the medium of courts of justice, whose duty it must be to declare all acts contrary to the manifest tenor of the Constitution void. Without this, all the reservations of particular rights or privileges would amount to nothing."218  Judicial duty—"so arduous a duty," Hamilton called it—requires courts to be "bulwarks of a limited Constitution against legislative encroachments,"219  including holding irrational anticompetitive actions unconstitutional. Such is life in a constitutional republic, which exalts constitutionalism over majoritarianism precisely in order to tell government "no." That's the paramount point, to tap the brakes rather than punch the gas.
The Court today rejects servility in the economic-liberty realm, fortifying protections for Texans seeking what Texans have always sought: a better life for themselves and their families. There remains, as Davy Crockett excitedly wrote his children, "a world of country to settle."220 
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: June 26, 2015
Justice Boyd, concurring in judgment.
I concur in the Court's judgment but do not fully agree with its reasoning. Specifically, I do not agree with the Court's  adoption of a new alternative test under which the Texas Constitution's "due course of law" provision invalidates any law that is "so unreasonably burdensome that it becomes oppressive in relation to the underlying governmental interest." Ante at    . Nevertheless, I conclude that the Texas statute requiring the petitioners—who merely remove superfluous hair using tweezing techniques—to obtain an esthetician's license is arbitrary and unreasonable, and therefore oppressive, because it has no rational relationship to a legitimate government interest.
The Texas Constitution provides that "[n]o citizen of this State shall be deprived of life, liberty, property, privileges or immunities, or in any manner disfranchised, except by the due course of the law of the land." Tex. Const. art. I, § 19. Under our precedent, this guarantee "contains both a procedural component and a substantive component." Barshop v. Medina Cnty. Underground Water Conservation Dist., 925 S.W.2d 618, 632 (Tex. 1996). The issue here is whether requiring the petitioners to obtain an esthetician's license as a condition for practicing their trade of eyebrow threading violates their substantive rights to liberty, property, privileges, or immunities without due course of law.
As the Court notes, this Court has "not been entirely consistent" in its articulation of the standard by which we review the constitutionality of economic regulations under the due course of law provision. Ante at    . Through the years, for example, we have variously said that laws are presumed to be constitutional and a law is invalid only if:
• it is "unreasonable and in contravention of common right," Milliken v. City Council of Weatherford, 54 Tex. 388, 394 (1881);
• it invades rights "without justifying occasion, or in an unreasonable, arbitrary, and oppressive way," Hous. & Tex. Cent. Ry. Co. v. City of Dall., 98 Tex. 396, 84 S.W. 648, 653 (Tex. 1905);
• it is not "sufficiently rational and reasonable," Tex. Workers' Comp. Comm'n v. Garcia, 893 S.W.2d 504, 525 (Tex. 1995);
• it has "no foundation in reason and is a mere arbitrary or irrational exercise of power having no substantial relation to the public health, the public morals, the public safety or the public welfare in its proper sense," Mayhew v. Town of Sunnyvale, 964 S.W.2d 922, 938 (Tex. 1998) (quoting Nectow v. City of Cambridge, 277 U.S. 183, 187-88, 48 S. Ct. 447, 72 L. Ed. 842 (1928));
• it is not "designed to accomplish an objective within the government's police power and [no] rational relationship exists between the ordinance and its purpose, id.;
• the "enacting body could [not] have rationally believed at the time of enactment that the ordinance would promote its objective," id.;
• it is not "at least fairly debatable that the [Legislature's] decision was rationally related to legitimate government interests," id.; or
• it is "clearly arbitrary and unreasonable," id.
These precedents illustrate the difficulty the Court has had articulating the appropriate standard. I would read our prior descriptions together, to provide that a law violates the substantive due course of law provision only if it is arbitrary and unreasonable, and therefore oppressive, because it has no rational relationship to a legitimate government interest. The Court, by contrast, holds that a law is invalid if its "purpose could not arguably be rationally related to a legitimate governmental interest" or "when considered as a whole, [its]  actual, real-world effect as applied to the challenging party could not arguably be rationally related to, or is so burdensome as to be oppressive in light of, the governmental interest." Ante at     (emphasis added). In other words, the Court holds that a law is invalid if it is "burdensome" and "oppressive in light of" the legitimate governmental interest, even if it is rationally related to that interest. As the Chief Justice notes in his dissent, "[n]either this Court nor any other the Court can find has ever used 'oppressive' as a test for substantive due process." Post at    ; see Hous. & Tex. Cent. Ry. Co., 84 S.W. at 653 (holding Constitution prohibits laws that invade substantive rights "without justifying occasion, or in an unreasonable, arbitrary, and oppressive way," not "or oppressive way").
I agree that the Court's new burdensome/oppressive standard is "loose"—too "loose," in fact, to be useful in our analysis of these types of constitutional challenges. See post at     (Hecht, C.J., dissenting). Determining what "burdensome" or "oppressive" means in this context will be nigh impossible, unless we use those terms, as we have in our prior opinions, to refer to the burdens that result from a law that is not rationally related to a legitimate government interest. Like Justice Guzman, "I have significant doubts that this standard is workable in practice." Post at    . And like both dissenting Justices, I believe the burdensome/oppressive standard makes it too easy for courts to invalidate regulations for their own personal policy reasons. See post at     (Hecht, C.J., dissenting); post at     (Guzman, J., dissenting). Because, as Justice Guzman notes, courts cannot and should not "legislate from the bench," post at    , the bar should be set very high, to ensure that it is indeed the Constitution, and not merely a court, that invalidates a law.
But the bar cannot be insurmountable, and if the application of any regulatory licensing scheme were ever constitutionally invalid, this one is. I need not repeat my colleagues' descriptions, because everyone (including the State and both dissenting Justices) agrees that requiring eyebrow threaders to complete the current requirements necessary to obtain an esthetician's license "is obviously too much." Post at     (Hecht, C.J., dissenting); post at     (Guzman, J., dissenting). Certainly, "[i]f there is room for a fair difference of opinion as to the necessity and reasonableness of a legislative enactment on a subject which lies within the domain of the police power, the courts will not hold it void." State v. Richards, 157 Tex. 166, 301 S.W.2d 597, 602 (Tex. 1957). But there is no difference of opinion here: requiring eyebrow threaders to obtain an esthetician's license is neither necessary nor reasonable. Requiring them to obtain training in sanitation and safety is rational, but requiring them to get an esthetician's license is not.
The Chief Justice suggests that "there is . . . evidence from which the Legislature could reasonably conclude that the required instruction and testing would further its goal of protecting public health and safety through the regulation of cosmetology." Post at    . I agree that protecting public health and safety is a legitimate government interest, but I do not agree that requiring eyebrow threaders to meet the current requirements for obtaining an esthetician's license is rationally related to achieving that interest. Under the dissenting Justices' approach, if the Legislature decided to require eyebrow threaders to obtain a medical license, we would have to uphold that decision because that licensing scheme also "instruct[s] in general sanitation and safety practices." Post at     (Hecht, C.J., dissenting).
 It may be convenient to impose the existing esthetician licensing scheme on eyebrow threaders, but in my view it is also arbitrary and unreasonable, and therefore oppressive, because doing so is not rationally related to the legitimate government interest in promoting public health and safety. Courts should not second-guess the Legislature, but in the end, as the Chief Justice agrees, "the final authority to interpret and apply the Constitution belongs to the Judiciary[.]" Post at    . Although that authority is "not lightly to be exercised," post at     (Hecht, C.J., dissenting), the Court is right to exercise it here.
I therefore concur in the judgment.
Jeffrey S. Boyd
Justice
Opinion delivered: June 26, 2015
