 in part.
I join Parts I-III of the Court's opinion. As for Part IV, I join the result but not the reasoning. There is a better approach, one more allegiant to the Legislature's words. Roccaforte's claim should proceed, but the reason is rooted not in his substantial compliance but rather the County's substantial dalliance.
* * *
Aristotle would have enjoyed this case, which perfectly illustrates the challenge he recognized of reconciling the "absoluteness" of the written law with equity in the particular case. 1  Believing that "the equitable is superior" and that rigid laws must bend, 2  Aristotle urged "a correction of law where it is defective owing to its universality." 3  From Athens, Greece to Athens, Texas (and beyond), judges still debate the bounds of interpretive discretion—whether it is appropriate to temper the "absoluteness" of statutory mandates and ameliorate their seeming harshness. Millennia may have passed since Aristotle's Lyceum, but this great philosophical and jurisprudential debate endures.
I
As the Court persuasively explains in Part III, the post-suit notice requirements in Section 89.0041 are not jurisdictional, meaning a County can waive a plaintiff's noncompliance. 4  Here, the County objected to Roccaforte's noncompliance, prompting the Court to ask: "Did the Legislature intend to bar Roccaforte's claim, merely because that notice was hand-delivered rather than mailed?" 5  If phrased that way, our recent and unanimous precedent answers the question "yes," since "the surest guide to legislative intent" is the language lawmakers chose. 6  In other words, "Where text is clear, it is determinative of that intent." 7  The Court today agrees that nothing in Section 89.0041 relieves  Roccaforte from compliance. So, to escape the statute's emphatic "shall dismiss the suit" mandate, 8  the Court pivots on "actual notice" and "substantial compliance" and holds that the statute's purpose was fulfilled via hand-delivery.
Honoring a statute's plain words is indispensable, even if enforcing those words as written works an unpalatable result. To be sure, courts deviate from otherwise-clear textual commands to avert "absurd" results or to vindicate constitutional principles. 9  But as a general matter, if the legal deck is stacked via technical statutory requirements, the Legislature should reshuffle the equities, not us. 10 
As for whether Section 89.0041's use of phrases like "shall deliver," 11  "must be delivered," 12  "as required," 13  and "shall dismiss" 14  mandates strict compliance, I would take the statute at face value. Beyond that, those desiring additional reassurance that lawmakers intended what they enacted can find it in a properly contextual reading of other notice-related statutes.
First, the Legislature, while omitting an actual-notice exception from Section 89.0041, expressly included one in the Tort Claims Act, stating the Act's pre-suit notice requirements "do not apply if the governmental unit has actual notice . . . ." 15  The Legislature understands how to let actual notice excuse technical noncompliance; it easily could have said actual notice suffices, thus obviating the need for service via certified or registered mail. Instead, it opted against actual notice, presumably on purpose. For better or worse, lawmakers enacted strict compliance, not substantial compliance. Our interpretive focus, both textual and contextual, must be on the law as written, and we should refuse to engraft what the Legislature has refused to enact.
Second, reading "actual notice" into Section 89.0041's post-suit notice requirement robs it of any real meaning and also makes Section 89.004's pre-suit notice requirement redundant. Section 89.004 forbids someone from suing a county or county official "unless the person has presented the claim to the commissioners court and the commissioners court neglects or refuses to pay all or part of the claim . . . ." 16  This presentment requirement assures actual notice of a claim before it is filed and was already on the books when Section 89.0041 was added in 2003. Logically then, Section 89.0041 must require something in addition to the preexisting notice and presentment requirements. 17 
 The requisite officials here received notice, but they did not receive "requisite notice," as the Court states. 18  The Court may deem it adequate, but it is irrefutably not requisite. As the Court reads Section 89.0041, it is not only nonjurisdictional (I agree on this point), but also nonmandatory. I acknowledge the statute's no-exceptions mandate works a harsh result, 19  but to the degree this seems a trap for the unwary, it is a trap the Legislature left well marked.
II
Having said all that, I agree with the Court that Roccaforte ultimately wins his notice dispute, but on different grounds. Instead of asking whether the Legislature meant to bar Roccaforte's claim, I would rephrase the question in a manner less assaultive to the statutory text: Did the County effectively waive Roccaforte's noncompliance by not timely asserting it? I believe so. 20 
 True, the County, after waiting for limitations to expire, filed a motion for dismissal complaining that Roccaforte provided notice via personal service rather than registered or certified mail. I believe that obscures the key point, which on these facts is not whether the County sought dismissal, but when. A governmental body can raise a jurisdictional bar like immunity from suit whenever it pleases because "the trial court does not have—and never had—power to decide the case," 21  thus making judgments forever vulnerable to delayed attack. Not so with nonjurisdictional requirements like this, which are waived if not timely raised. Under our precedent, dismissal delayed is sometimes dismissal denied: "The failure of a non-jurisdictional requirement mandated by statute may result in the loss of a claim, but that failure must be timely asserted and compliance can be waived." 22  Moreover, "if a governmental unit is to avoid litigation to which it should not be subjected because of lack of notice, it should raise the issue as soon as possible." 23  On these facts, there was no timely assertion, much less one made "as soon as possible." 24 
We have held that waiver is decided on a case-by-case basis, meaning courts look to the totality of the circumstances. 25  Here,  the County sought dismissal based on imperfect notice more than two years after suit was filed; more than two years after the County filed its answer; more than two years after the County filed its special exceptions; after the County presented three County officials for deposition and defended those depositions; after the County sent written discovery requests; after the County deposed Roccaforte; and after the County filed a motion for continuance. If two-plus years qualifies as "timely asserted" or "as soon as possible"—at least in the context of a statutory notice requirement commanding action—then these phrases have been drained of all meaning. 26  Indeed, the only thing the County "timely asserted" was limitations. I would disallow the County's belated insistence on dismissal given its decision to defend the case for so long, asserting noncompliance only after seizing tactical advantage via limitations, and thus materially prejudicing Roccaforte. There is no countervailing prejudice in allowing Roccaforte's suit to proceed against the County, which can hardly argue at this late stage that imperfect notice has harmed its legal position (unlike its fiscal position, having underwritten years of legal and judicial expenses). On these facts, two-plus years of litigation activity to run out the limitations clock betrays the County's too-little, too-late request for dismissal and constitutes waiver.
* * *
The Court's understandable desire to work an eminently fair result has led it to revise the statute as desired rather than read it as enacted. I favor a different approach to the same outcome. Roccaforte should win not because the Court waived the Legislature's words but because the County did.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: April 29, 2011

 

