  
Concur




Justice Willett, concurring.
Since 2006 we have circled an issue both recurring and elusive: whether any document, even one that never accuses anyone of committing malpractice, suffices to warrant an unreviewable thirty-day extension under Section 74.351(c).1  Until today, the issue was procedurally (and frustratingly) unreachable and thus unresolvable. Finally it is squarely presented, and I am confident today's decision will brighten the line between deficient-report cases (where an extension is discretionary) and no-report cases (where dismissal is mandatory).
* * *
In a trio of concurrences in 2007,2  2008,3  and 2009,4  I focused on this nagging question: Is there a legal difference between filing nothing and filing something that amounts to nothing? That is, can a filing be so utterly lacking in the required statutory elements as to be no report at all, thus requiring dismissal? I join today's decision, which I read to confirm my consistently stated view: If a document bears zero resemblance to what the statute envisions—more to the point, if it never asserts that anyone did anything wrong—it cannot receive an extension.
In Ogletree v. Matthews, I described what I naively hoped would be "a rare bird in Texas legal practice"5 —a plaintiff passing off as a bona fide report a document so facially absurd that, "no matter how charitably viewed, it simply cannot be deemed an 'expert report' at all, even a deficient one."6  The deficient-or-no-report issue was not present in Ogletree, but I noticed it in another then-pending case, Lewis v. Funderburk, filed one week before Ogletree.7 
In Funderburk, the Court confronted "an actual sighting of this rare bird, a species that in my view merits extinction, not conservation."8  The "report" in Funderburk was a thank-you letter from one  doctor to another—a letter that never once in any manner, way, shape, or form accused anyone of malpractice.9  This thanks-for-your-referral letter was no more a medical-expert report "than a doctor-signed prescription or Christmas card would be," I wrote, adding, "If a report is missed, not just amiss, courts are remiss if they do not dismiss."10  Alas, the defendant did not raise the "no report" issue, thus foreclosing a merits-based challenge.11 
Finally came In re Watkins, where a plaintiff merely filed a narrative of treatment, something that omitted every statutorily required element and had no apparent relationship to a medical- malpractice case.12  Like Funderburk, this case also had a procedural wrinkle that kept the marquee "no report" vs. "deficient report" issue out of reach.13  But the rare-bird sightings, I noticed, were becoming more commonplace. And they would proliferate on our docket, I predicted, absent appellate enforcement of the statute's mandatory-dismissal provisionn14 —or alternatively, this Court's express adoption of a grace-period test that is indeed gracious, allowing extensions for most everything.
Under the Court's admittedly "lenient standard,"15  the document must merely "[contain] a statement of opinion by an individual with expertise indicating that the claim asserted by the plaintiff against the defendant has merit."16  The line is forgiving but bright: The "report" must actually allege someone committed malpractice. The genesis of this elemental requirement is found in Ogletree, where the Court first indicated that the purported report must implicate a provider's conduct.17  It merits emphasis, however, that today's standard, benevolent as it is, is not satisfied by any medical-related piece of paper; the bar is low but not subterranean. For example, the "report" in Funderburk would surely fail even today's lax test. The thank-you letter in that case never mentioned malpractice by anyone,  even in the most implicit or glancing manner. Again, it is not merely that the letter omitted every required statutory element. Rather, it never even hinted at having any relationship to a malpractice case at all—no mention of a claim or a defendant, much less a claim that "an individual with expertise" indicates "has merit."18 
* * *
Based on my understanding of the Court's "minimal standard"19 —requiring that someone with expertise express an opinion that the plaintiff has a meritorious malpractice claim against the defendant—I join the Court's decision.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: July 1, 2011
