



Time and time again, this Court has emphasized that statutes must be construed in context and that every word must be given effect. In this case, we read the specific provision at issue, which outlines the effect of a recorded order expunging a notice of lis pendens, in the context of the overall statutory scheme governing lis-pendens notices and bona-fide real-property purchasers. Under this approach, I believe the only reasonable interpretation is that all subsequent purchasers may rely equally on the expunction  order, regardless of how they learned of the underlying lis-pendens action. In holding that the order has no effect on purchasers who initially learned about the action from a source other than the lis-pendens notice itself, the Court reads a specific provision in isolation—missing the forest for the trees—and in doing so undercuts stalwart principles of statutory interpretation. Accordingly, I must respectfully express my dissent.
 I. Background
Sommers' predecessor in interest, Jay Cohen, filed suit alleging fraudulent transfers of real property. Cohen recorded a notice of lis pendens relating to that suit, but the trial court ordered the notice expunged on the ground that Cohen "failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence the probable validity of a real property claim." Sandcastle Homes, Inc. and NewBiss Property, LP (the Buyers) each purchased a parcel of the property that was the subject of the fraudulent-transfer suit, and Cohen sought to set aside those conveyances. The issue here is the effect, if any, of the trial court's recorded expunction order on the Buyers' bona-fide purchaser status. The Buyers argue the expunction order eliminates all notice of the suit and renders them bona-fide purchasers, while Sommers argues the order had no effect on the Buyers' notice of the suit obtained independently of the lis-pendens notice itself, and that the Buyers therefore took the property subject to the suit's outcome.
 II. Discussion  
A. Effect of Recorded Expunction Order on Subsequent Purchasers
A properly recorded notice of lis pendens constitutes "notice to the world," including subsequent purchasers, that an action is pending "involving title to real property, the establishment of an interest in real property, or the enforcement of an encumbrance against real property." Tex. Prop. Code §§ 13.004(a), 12.007(a). But a recorded court order expunging the lis-pendens notice also impacts subsequent purchasers:
After a certified copy of an order expunging a notice of lis pendens has been recorded, the notice of lis pendens and any information derived from the notice:
(1) does not:
(A) constitute constructive or actual notice of any matter contained in the notice or of any matter relating to the proceeding;
(B) create any duty of inquiry in a person with respect to the property described in the notice; or
(C) affect the validity of a conveyance to a purchaser for value or of a mortgage to a lender for value; and
(2) is not enforceable against a purchaser or lender described by Subdivision (1)(C), regardless of whether the purchaser or lender knew of the lis pendens action.
Tex. Prop. Code § 12.0071(f).1  Noting that the "extent" of the expunction statute's protection of subsequent purchasers "is expressly limited to 'the notice of lis pendens' and 'any information derived from the notice,'" the Court holds that a recorded expunction order has no effect on subsequent purchasers who learned of the underlying action independently of the lis-pendens notice. Ante at    . This means that such purchasers take the property subject to the outcome of the claims  being litigated, while purchasers who learned of the exact same litigation via the notice of lis pendens (either constructively or by reading the notice) take the property free and clear of the claimant's interest. In effect, a purchaser's ability to rely on the expunction order depends on the source of the purchaser's notice of the underlying suit.
The Court reaches this decision by reading the phrase "information derived from the notice [of lis pendens]" in subsection (f) to encompass only the actual contents of the notice itself. In my view, this interpretation fails to give full effect to subsection (f)'s language and the surrounding statutory context. As discussed below, I would read the provision more broadly than the Court to generally encompass information about the underlying lis-pendens action. I believe this is the only reasonable construction of the statute when read as a whole. See City of Lorena v. BMTP Holdings, L.P., 409 S.W.3d 634, 641 (Tex. 2013) ("We examine statutes as a whole to contextually give meaning to every provision.").
First, the specific language of subsection (f) supports this construction. The statute provides that "[a]fter [an expunction order] has been recorded, the notice of lis pendens and any information derived from the notice . . . is not enforceable against a purchaser . . . regardless of whether the purchaser . . . knew of the lis pendens action." Tex. Prop. Code § 12.0071(f)(2) (emphasis added). This language indicates that the source of the purchaser's knowledge—whether actual or constructive, and whether from the lis-pendens notice or some other point of origin—is immaterial. Moreover, "information about the underlying lawsuit" and "information derived from the lis-pendens notice" are essentially synonymous phrases, as the entire point of a lis-pendens notice is to tell the world about the lawsuit. Id. §§ 12.007(a), 13.004(a). Subsection (f) therefore has broader impact than the Court allows.
Moreover, considering subsection (f) in the context of the overall legislative framework governing bona-fide purchasers cements this interpretation. Under the codified bona-fide purchaser doctrine, an instrument reflecting a property conveyance or interest will not cloud the title of a subsequent purchaser, so long as the purchaser pays valuable consideration and lacks actual and constructive notice of the instrument. Id. § 13.001. All persons have constructive notice of instruments that are "properly recorded in the proper county." Id. § 13.002. These statutes place purchasers with constructive notice of a property interest on even footing with those who have actual notice; that is, the recorded instrument will cloud their respective titles equally.
In turn, a notice of lis pendens qualifies as an instrument reflecting a property interest, and recording it in the proper county "constructively notif[ies] anyone taking an interest in real property that a claim is being litigated against the property." Long Beach Mortg. Co. v. Evans, 284 S.W.3d 406, 414 (Tex. App.—Dallas 2009, pet. denied). Thus, a properly recorded lis-pendens notice places prospective buyers who don't actually know about the pending action in the same position as those who do: both will acquire their interest in the property subject to the claims being litigated. World Sav. Bank, F.S.B. v. Gantt, 246 S.W.3d 299, 303 (Tex. App.—Houston [14th Dist.] 2008, no pet.); see also Tex. Prop. Code § 13.004(b) ("A transfer or encumbrance of real property involved in a proceeding . . . to a third party who has paid a valuable consideration and who does not have actual or constructive notice of the proceeding is effective . . . unless a notice of the pendency of the proceeding  has been recorded . . . in each county in which the property is located."). Again, actual notice and constructive notice have the same legal consequences.
By providing a mechanism for constructive notice of an action involving real property, the Property Code protects the claimant's alleged rights in the disputed property. Collins v. Tex. Mall, L.P., 297 S.W.3d 409, 418 (Tex. App.—Fort Worth 2009, no pet.). But as the court of appeals in this case recognized, these provisions can also serve to encumber property for lengthy periods of time, irrespective of the merits of the underlying claim. 469 S.W.3d 179, 182 (Tex. App.—Houston [1st Dist.] 2015) (citing Herbert A. Janzen, Texas Statutory Notice of Lis Pendens: A Deprivation of Property Interest without Due Process?, 19 St. Mary's L.J. 377, 385 (1987)). Accordingly, the Property Code also provides a procedure by which another party to the action may seek to have the notice of lis pendens "expunged," that is, "erase[d] or destroy[ed]." Tex. Prop. Code § 12.0071; Expunge, Black's Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014). As is relevant here, the statute requires the trial court to order a lis-pendens notice expunged if "the claimant fails to establish by a preponderance of the evidence the probable validity of the real property claim." Tex. Prop. Code § 12.0071(c)(2).2  The claimant must therefore satisfy a threshold evidentiary showing on the merits of its real-property claim to continue to encumber the property during the pendency of the underlying suit. If the claimant cannot do so and an expunction order is entered and recorded, subsection (f) ensures that neither the notice of lis pendens nor the "information derived from the notice"—that is, the suit itself—is enforceable against a subsequent purchaser for value. Id. § 12.0071(f).
In this way, the Legislature provided a method to remove the cloud on title created by the lis-pendens notice and the underlying lawsuit when that suit lacks merit. But even though all persons have notice of a recorded expunction order, the Court holds that not all persons may rely on it. Instead, some subsequent purchasers will still take the property subject to the outcome of the suit, but others will not, depending on how they first learned about the action. So although a recorded lis-pendens notice places subsequent purchasers on equal footing, a recorded expunction order does the opposite, and only those who learned of the suit via the notice may rely on the order. I see no logical basis for this distinction and cannot conclude that the Legislature intended such disparate treatment.
Instead, I agree with the following apt explanation proffered by the court of appeals:
The statutory provisions providing for expungement of lis pendens notices—the aim of which is to curtail burdening of real property pretrial, for lengthy periods, without evidentiary support—would be of little use if every case necessitated inquiry into, and turned on, whether a purchaser physically read the lis pendens or was told about the lis pendens or the underlying lawsuit by another person. Read as a whole, the lis pendens and expungement scheme is designed to differentiate cases in which the proponent of the notice of lis pendens can demonstrate a probable right of recovery on an underlying real-property claim from cases in which the proponent cannot;  nothing indicates that the legislature intended the determination of whether title to a property is encumbered to turn instead on whether each potential buyer learns of an underlying claim that is the subject of a lis pendens notice by literally reading the notice or by some other means.
469 S.W.3d at 185. The court's reasoning is sound and demonstrates the importance of reading statutes contextually.
In sum, the lis-pendens statute protects a claimant's rights in the disputed property against subsequent purchasers, regardless of whether they have actual knowledge of the underlying suit. But a recorded expunction order renders the lis-pendens notice and underlying action unenforceable with respect to a subsequent bona-fide purchaser for value "regardless of whether the purchaser . . . knew of the lis pendens action." Tex. Prop. Code § 12.0071(f)(2). I would hold that, however a subsequent purchaser acquires knowledge (actual or constructive) of the underlying lis-pendens action, he is entitled to rely on the expunction order. That is, I would hold that the source of the purchaser's knowledge of the lis-pendens action is irrelevant to his bona-fide purchaser status.3 
 B. Timing of the Expunction Order
In light of my interpretation of the expunction statute, I would hold that NewBiss's purchase of Tract II is not burdened by Sommers' litigation. However, I cannot say the same about Sandcastle's purchase of Tract I. As the Court notes, the court of appeals stayed the trial court's expunction order while it considered a request for mandamus relief. Ante at    . The stay was filed in the real property records, and Sandcastle acquired Tract I while that stay was in effect. In evaluating notice and bona-fide purchaser status, one must look at the state of the property records at the time of purchase. See Tex. Prop. Code § 13.001(a) (describing the effect of recorded instruments on "a subsequent purchaser"). Because the expunction order had been stayed when Sandcastle purchased Tract I, he cannot have relied on that order. Accordingly, I agree with the Court that Sandcastle's title to Tract I is subject to the outcome of the suit.
 III. Conclusion
I agree with the court of appeals' interpretation of the expunction statute and would affirm its judgment as to NewBiss. However, because I conclude Sandcastle may not rely on an expunction order that was stayed when Sandcastle purchased Tract I, I agree with the Court that the court of appeals' judgment should be reversed as to Sandcastle. Accordingly, I concur in the Court's judgment in part and otherwise respectfully dissent.
Debra H. Lehrmann
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: June 16, 2017
Sommers argues that Sandcastle and NewBiss had actual knowledge of the Cohen lawsuit concerning the West Newcastle property when they bought the property, and that they acquired this knowledge independently of the lis pendens notices of  the Cohen lawsuit. On this basis, Sommers says the trial court erred in granting summary judgment for Sandcastle and NewBiss, and the Court agrees.
Frankly, the statute is a linguistic mare's nest. The Court today refers to the statute's "plain text"1  and "plain language,"2  but this provision is the antithesis of plain. It is a muddle the Court must muddle through. And while I understand the Court's interpretation, I do not share it. I read the statute differently, and would reach a different result—namely, one that doesn't effectively repeal subsection (f)(2). I agree with the trial court and the court of appeals that the statute grants bona-fide purchaser status to Sandcastle and NewBiss.
* * *
Subsection 12.0071(f) of the Property Code states:
After a certified copy of an order expunging a notice of lis pendens has been recorded, the notice of lis pendens and any information derived from the notice:
(1) does not:
(A) constitute constructive or actual notice of any matter contained in the notice or of any matter relating to the proceeding;
(B) create any duty of inquiry in a person with respect to the property described in the notice; or
(C) affect the validity of a conveyance to a purchaser for value; and
(2) is not enforceable against a purchaser or lender described by Subdivision (1)(C), regardless of whether the purchaser or lender knew of the lis pendens action.3 
The recorded order of expunction negates "the notice of lis pendens and any information derived from the notice."4  The Court reasons that since a fact issue is present as to whether "Sandcastle and NewBiss had actual, independent knowledge of the issues covered by the lis pendens notice," summary judgment for them was inappropriate.5 
This case turns on the meaning of "notice of lis pendens." The Court reasons that "a notice of lis pendens" and "the notice of lis pendens" referenced in the opening passage of subsection 12.0071(f) means the written, recorded notices of lis pendens filed by Cohen. For example, the Court reads subsection 12.0071(f) as inapplicable if the purchaser "receives notice of a third-party claim by some means other than a recorded notice of lis pendens."6  It says the statute addresses "notice arising from the lis pendens filing"7  and "directs expunction of a recorded lis pendens notice and eradicates the effects of filing one."8  This construction is not unquestionably wrong. For one thing, subsection 12.0071(a) permits an application to expunge in cases "in which a notice of lis  pendens has been filed."9  When construing a statutory provision, we can and should consider the provision in the context of related provisions and the statute as a whole.10 
But there is another plausible reading. I read "notice of lis pendens" in subsection 12.0071(f) more broadly than the Court, and would construe the term to mean, simply, notice or knowledge of pending litigation regarding the property in question. I would not limit the clause to mean a written, recorded notice of lis pendens. Under this reading, Sandcastle and NewBiss took title free of the claim reflected in the recorded notice of lis pendens whether they acquired knowledge of the underlying litigation from the recorded document or other sources.
In construing a statute, we should begin, and usually end, the inquiry by looking to the plain and common meaning of its words.11  "[N]otice of lis pendens" in subsection 12.0071(f) is not expressly limited to a written, recorded document. "Lis pendens" literally means "a pending lawsuit" and retains that meaning in modern legal parlance. Black's Law Dictionary not only notes, in its etymology of "lis pendens," that the term is Latin for "a pending lawsuit," but unremarkably states as its first definition that the term means "[a] pending lawsuit."12  So a notice of lis pendens need not always be a legal term of art. It can simply mean notice of pending litigation.
Of course, the especially important legal consequence of a notice of lis pendens is ordinarily manifested when the notice is written up according to statutory requirements and recorded in the courthouse real-property records. Section 12.007 of the Property Code, titled "Lis Pendens," states that a party to a title dispute "may file for record with the county clerk . . . a notice that the action is pending,"13  provided that the notice includes certain required particulars of the title suit.14  Under the Code, "[a] recorded lis pendens is notice to the world of its contents."15 
Hence, the effect of a recorded and statutorily compliant notice of lis pendens is  that all would-be purchasers are put on constructive notice that the filer has brought a suit claiming an interest in the property, thus precluding the would-be purchaser from acquiring innocent-purchaser status.16  The lis pendens procedure is part of the Property Code's Title 3, which is titled "Public Records" and provides a general system for the public recording of real-estate records. It is a Texas version of recording acts that date back hundreds of years.17  According to one author, "The Recording Acts have come into existence primarily to fulfill the 'needs' and requirements of the people enacting them—the ultimate need being the protection of the bona fide purchaser for value in a real estate conveyance."18  We have noted that public property records generally "constitute constructive notice" and serve the "need for stability and certainty regarding titles to real property."19 
Chapter 13 of Title 3 is titled "Effects of Recording." The general effect of recording a real-property interest is set out in subsection 13.001(a). A conveyance of an interest "is void as to a creditor or subsequent purchaser for a valuable consideration without notice" unless the conveyance is recorded.20  However, an "unrecorded instrument is binding . . . on a subsequent purchaser . . . who has notice of the instrument."21  In other words, a purchaser is not entitled to bona-fide purchaser status if he has actual knowledge of a property interest, even if the interest is not properly recorded under the recording statutes so as to provide constructive notice to everyone. And specifically as to pending litigation regarding real property, subsection 13.004(b) provides that even if a notice of lis pendens is not properly prepared and filed, a third party takes title to the property free of the lis pendens proceeding only if the third party "does not have actual or constructive notice of the proceeding."22  In other words, the purchaser's actual knowledge of the proceeding defeats bona-fide purchaser status even if constructive notice was not provided under the recording statutes by way of a properly prepared and filed notice of lis pendens.
 But subsection 12.0071(f) is different. Its effect is not confined to constructive notice. It states to the contrary in subsection (f)(2) that after a court takes the affirmative step of expunging a notice of lis pendens, the recording of that order protects purchasers like Sandcastle and NewBiss "regardless of whether the purchaser or lender knew of the lis pendens action."23  I read it to bestow bona-fide purchaser status whether the purchaser became aware of the pending litigation through direct knowledge, or the purchaser is deemed aware of the pending litigation through constructive knowledge that is imputed "to the world" by a properly filed notice of lis pendens. We can give effect to subsection (f)(2) by reading "notice of lis pendens" at the beginning of subsection 12.0071(f) to include both constructive notice from the filed notice of lis pendens as well as notice of the "lis pendens," literally the pending litigation, from other sources.
The problem with the Court's construction is that it effectively repeals subsection (f)(2). The Court holds that Sandcastle's and NewBiss' knowledge of the Cohen suit from sources independent of the written, recorded notice of lis pendens defeats bona-fide purchaser status, despite subsection (f)(2)'s command that their notice of the pending litigation "is not enforceable" against them "regardless of whether the purchaser or lender knew of the lis pendens action."24  The Court interprets the "regardless of" language to refer only to actual or constructive notice derived from the written, recorded notice of lis pendens. But if the Court is right that section 12.0071 applies only to the notice of lis pendens document, constructive or actual notice is already extinguished under this section—directly before subsection (f)(2) in subsection (f)(1): "the notice of lis pendens . . . does not . . . constitute constructive or actual notice of any matter contained in the notice . . . ."25  The Court's interpretation thus renders subsection (f)(2) a nullity, holding it merely reiterates the notice already eliminated in subsection (f)(1). But proper statutory interpretation gives effect to each provision of a statute—ensuring none is rendered meaningless or "mere surplusage."26  Moreover, the language of subsection (f)(2) expressly encompasses both imputed knowledge of the sort ordinarily associated with a filed notice of lis pendens and actual knowledge of the title dispute acquired from other sources.
My interpretation of subsection 12.0071(f) better harmonizes and gives meaning to all the subsections of the provision, including subsection (f)(2). It is also consistent with other provisions of the Code, which specify the effect of a recorded or filed notice of lis pendens, as opposed to subsection 12.0071(f), which does not specify a notice of lis pendens that has been filed or recorded. In matters of statutory construction, we should strive to harmonize the statute's provisions and give effect to all of them.27 
 Further, there is nothing anomalous in construing subsection 12.0071(f) as providing more expansive bona-fide purchaser protection than, say, sections 13.001 or 13.004. Those provisions concern the effect of recording a real-estate document vel non. But the expunction proceeding set out in section 12.0071 requires action by a court, which may consider sworn evidence, conduct an oral hearing, and order discovery28 —in short, actual litigation of the validity of the lis pendens claim.
* * *
In my view, "notice of lis pendens" in subsection 12.0071(f) simply and broadly means notice or knowledge of Cohen's suit involving the property, meaning the recorded order of expungement allowed Sandcastle and NewBiss to claim bona-fide purchaser status, free of Cohen's claims. I would affirm the court of appeals' judgment, which in turn affirmed the trial court's summary judgment for Sandcastle and NewBiss.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: June 16, 2017

 

