  
Concur




Justice Willett, concurring.
I join the Court's opinion but write separately on Part V to emphasize this overlooked truism: It is principally the judiciary's role to define and delimit common-law causes of action. In our constitutional design, the judicial branch is a partner, but not a junior partner1 —and shaping Texas common law is fundamentally a judicial prerogative.
* * *
Today the Court overrules Aranda v. Insurance Co. of North America2  and holds a common-law action for bad faith is no longer warranted in the workers' compensation context. I agree. The dissent avers the proper inquiry is whether the Legislature intended to abrogate extra-statutory Aranda claims when it amended the Workers' Compensation Act in 1989. Respectfully, this focus on legislative action  is misplaced, at least in this case. To be sure, the Legislature has some power to override or otherwise limit common-law remedies.3  However, this is a high hurdle, one clearly uncleared here.4  As such, the search for some legislative suggestion on whether Aranda should survive—an inquiry both the majority and the dissent eventually entertain—is at best fruitless, and at worst, dangerously speculative.5  The more proper inquiry, respectfully, is whether the Court believes Aranda still has a place, not whether the Legislature believes so.
Statutory abrogation is not the sole way to re-think a common-law cause of action. In determining the continued vitality of the bad-faith remedy in workers' compensation cases, I would pivot on something simpler: this Court's nonpareil role as arbiter of the common law. It is the duty of the judicial branch to declare what the common law is: "The law is not static; and the courts, whenever reason and equity demand, have been the primary instruments for changing the common law through a continual re-evaluation of common law concepts in light of current conditions."6  This charge is indeed an ongoing one: "[T]he common law is not frozen or stagnant, but evolving, and it is the duty of this [C]ourt to recognize that evolution."7  Accordingly, we are called upon to re-evaluate common-law rules, giving deference to stare decisis when warranted, but departing when the prior rule no longer furthers the interests of efficiency, fairness, and legitimacy.8  As we noted 142 years ago, "When the reason of the rule fails, the rule itself should cease. Cessante ratione legis, cessat ipsa lex."9 
This axiom is sufficient to resolve today's case because, as the Court so ably details, the "reason" behind Aranda is no more. When we extended the duty of good faith and fair dealing to workers' compensation carriers in Aranda, we did so because of the "special trust relationship" between a carrier and an employee.10  This relationship does not exist in every contractual agreement, but we recognized it in the workers' compensation context because of employees' particular vulnerability. Under the pre-1989 comp  system, there was a tremendous disparity of bargaining power, leaving employees with little to no recourse against arbitrary payment decisions.11  Concerned with such inadequacies, we allowed a common-law remedy for bad faith to fill the gap.
A year later, the gap was made less gaping. Observers may dispute whether the Legislature's 1989 overhaul eliminated the bargaining disparity between carriers and employees, but it is indisputable that the top-to-bottom reforms enacted then (and since) have lessened the concerns that animated Aranda. By providing a strict dispute resolution timeline, a mechanism for interlocutory benefits, penalties for myriad carrier misdeeds, assistance for injured workers, and a litany of other protections throughout the Labor and Insurance Codes, the Legislature has endeavored to occupy the realm of claims handling and reduce the inequities that drove us to announce a common-law duty. My review today of the Legislature's pervasive workers' comp regime convinces me that (1) Aranda's concerns with carrier misbehavior have been addressed, and therefore (2) Aranda's cumulative extra-statutory remedy should now recede.
Otherwise, there is a very real possibility that the continued existence of bad-faith claims will subvert the Legislature's meticulous soup-to-nuts system, one augmented by an immense regulatory and adjudicatory framework that, taken together, now regulates virtually every aspect of how a carrier handles a workers' comp matter. In the past, this Court has been hesitant to extend common-law causes of action into fields where a pervasive regulatory scheme controls, specifically because of this potential for interference.12  We should exercise similar deference when considering whether to draw back an extra-statutory remedy in light of legislative changes.
The Legislature's radical 1989 restructuring certainly made room for our 1988 Aranda decision, but that to me suggests not affirmation but accommodation. In any case, whether lawmakers acknowledged Aranda out of politeness (the Supreme Court says bad-faith claims must exist) or deliberateness (the Legislature agrees such claims must exist), it is our decision whether the bad-faith remedy retains any role as a leveler or equalizer within a pervasive statutory scheme that controls claims handling in minute detail and bears little resemblance to the inequitable pre-Aranda landscape.
Our 2010 Waffle House decision is instructive. There, we considered whether the plaintiff could bring a common-law negligence claim against her employer in light of the TCHRA's "unique set of substantive rules and procedures" governing sexual harassment.13  We answered that she could not after determining that the differences between the two causes of action—in procedure, and standards, and remedies—were "manifold."14  Because of those differences, we rejected the common-law claim for fear of circumventing  the "meticulous legislative design."15  We could apply the same analysis here because the inherently fuzzy nature of the bad-faith tort has a tendency to produce conflicting liability standards inconsistent with the Legislature's statutory approach to carrier malfeasance and accountability.16  I think it unwise to invite these potential complications, particularly in an area so imbued with public policy trade-offs, and where the Legislature has specifically addressed our concerns over how comp claims are processed.
* * *
Aranda was rooted in specific claims-handling inequities in the pre-1989 comp system, inequities the Legislature has re-balanced. Accordingly, in light of the Legislature's hermetic workers' compensation regime, the time has come for the Court—exercising its authority to define and delimit common-law remedies—to overrule Aranda, a judicial gap-filler whose underlying rationale no longer exists.
Don R. Willett
Justice
OPINION DELIVERED: June 22, 2012
