.
In City of Bellmead v. Torres, we held that whether the recreational use statute applies depends on the particular activity the plaintiff was engaging in at the time of the injury. Here, the plaintiff was injured while attempting to acquire and sign forms authorizing a high school to release her daughter after the conclusion of a high school soccer match. Under City of Bellmead, we must examine whether this particular activity qualifies as recreational use. Under the statute's plain language and our precedent, it does not. Justice Devine's plurality opinion, however, departs from the precision our jurisprudence  requires by focusing on the activity the plaintiff had completed before she was injured—spectating. Thus, while I join in the Court's judgment that the recreational use statute does not apply, I do so on different grounds. Accordingly, I respectfully concur in the Court's judgment.
Absent gross negligence, malicious intent, or bad faith, the recreational use statute protects property owners from claims for personal injuries that occur on their property during recreational activities. See Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code § 75.002(d). In City of Bellmead v. Torres, we explained that the statute is a premises defect statute and, as a result, whether a particular action qualifies as "recreation" turns entirely on the precise activity the plaintiff was engaged in when the injury occurs. 89 S.W.3d 611, 614 (Tex. 2002). Accordingly, we categorized the various exploits the plaintiff engaged in while at the park—playing softball and swinging on the swing—and then focused narrowly on the activity the plaintiff was performing when she was injured. Id. at 612, 614. In pinpointing the action that caused the injury, we disregarded both the reasons the plaintiff went to the park and the pursuits the plaintiff engaged in before the injury occurred. Id. at 612. City of Bellmead provides the framework for analyzing the applicability of the recreational use statute to the circumstances in this case: (1) what is the precise activity the plaintiff was engaged in when she was injured and (2) does that particular activity qualify as "recreation" under the statute?
There is no dispute that Sandra Williams had attended her daughter's high school soccer game at the University of Texas football stadium in Arlington and pursued that action to its conclusion without incident. However, per the high school's athletics policy, Williams's daughter could not leave the stadium with her family after the game until a parent signed a release form. Attempting to comply with school policy, Williams walked down the stadium's steps to the field after the game ended to gain access to the clipboard containing the form she needed to sign to leave the stadium with her child. In the process of acquiring the clipboard, Williams leaned on a gate that provides access from the stands to the field. The gate opened unexpectedly, and Williams fell five feet to the field below, injuring her rib and left arm. It defies logic to conclude Williams could have been a spectator when her injury occurred because the match had ended. Instead, at the time Williams was injured, she had fully transitioned to a new activity—acquiring and signing a release form in accordance with school policy.
Because Williams was injured while acquiring a release form, City of Bellmead requires us to determine whether this activity is "recreation." As defined by statute, "recreation" expressly includes: hunting, fishing, swimming, boating, camping, picnicking, hiking, pleasure driving, nature study, cave exploration, water sports, bicycling, mountain biking, disc golf, dog walking, and radio control flying. Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code § 75.001(3). None of these activities encompass the act of retrieving one's child after a school sporting event. See id. Thus, to be protected, the activity must fall within a catchall provision extending the definition of recreation to "any other activity associated with enjoying nature or the outdoors." Id. § 75.001(3)(L). To qualify as recreation, the principle of ejusdem generis requires the activity be similar to those sports and hobbies expressly identified in the statute. Cf. City of Houston v. Bates, 406 S.W.3d 539, 545 (Tex. 2013). And in keeping with this principle, Texas precedent identifies a number of similar and thus qualifying recreational activities. See, e.g., City of Bellmead,  89 S.W.3d at 614—15 (swinging); Univ. of Tex. Health Science Center v. Garcia, 346 S.W.3d 220, 226 (Tex. App.—Houston [14th Dist.] 2011, no pet.) (playing beach volleyball); Garcia v. City of Richardson, No. 05—01—01755—CV, 2002 Tex. App. LEXIS 5556, 2002 WL 1752219, at *2—3 (Tex. App.—Dallas July 30, 2002, pet. denied) (mem. op., not designated for publication) (playing an informal soccer game); Kopplin v. City of Garland, 869 S.W.2d 433, 441 (Tex. App.—Dallas 1993, writ denied) (playing on playground equipment). In stark contrast to these obvious recreational activities, the act of acquiring and signing a release form as a precursor to leaving the stadium with your child is not akin to the sports and hobbies expressly listed in the statute.
Justice Boyd asserts that the Legislature defined recreation to broadly include activities that are incident to, but may not themselves qualify, as "enjoying nature or the outdoors." Slip op. at     (BOYD, J., concurring). I disagree. Construing the catchall provision to broadly encompass independent ancillary activities—such as signing a consent authorization form—does not comport with the principle of ejusdem generis, rendering the prior and subsequent statutorily enumerated activities superfluous. Rather, we must construe the catchall phrase no more broadly than the Legislature intended. Bates, 406 S.W.3d at 545.
The Legislature did not purport to incorporate an activity merely because its occurs outdoors. See Sullivan v. City of Fort Worth, No. 02-10-00223-CV, 2011 Tex. App. LEXIS 3866, 2011 WL 1902018, at *7 (Tex. App.—Fort Worth May 19, 2011, pet. denied) (mem. op. on reh'g) (holding that a guest attending a wedding in a city garden was not engaged in recreation when she fell on an unlit pathway, reasoning that "[a] wedding is not the type of activity in which people engage assuming a risk of injury from physical activity. Thus, we do not think that the wedding transforms from a ceremony to recreation simply because it occurred outside."). Nor did the Legislature intend to include activities that, while temporally related to a recreational activity, have no actual connection to an individual's enjoyment of nature or the outdoors. Instead, we must construe the catchall provision narrowly to encompass only those activities closely connected to enjoying the outdoors. See Webster'S New Universal Abridged Dictionary 126 (1996) ("associate" means "usually accompanying"); Webster'S New Collegiate Dictionary 67 (1980) (defining "associate" as "closely connected."). Signing an authorization form, even when it occurs at an outdoor stadium, bears no relationship to activities associated with enjoying nature or the outdoors—Williams could just as easily have arrived at the stadium solely for the purpose of retrieving her child. In contrast, when the evidence indicates an activity is closely related to a recreational activity, the statute may apply. See, e.g., City of Plano v. Homoky, 294 S.W.3d 809, 817 (Tex. App.—Dallas 2009, no pet.) (falling in the clubhouse immediately after turning in a golf scorecard is closely related to playing golf). Because signing an authorization form is an activity unrelated to enjoying the outdoors, I cannot conclude that the Legislature intended that catchall provision to encompass this particular activity.
Because Williams was not engaged in recreation at the time of her injury, the recreational use statute does not bear on this dispute, and we need not address whether spectating, in and of itself, is a recreational use. Thus, I concur only in the Court's judgment.
Eva M. Guzman
Justice
Justice Boyd, concurring.
Legend has it that Midas secured his father's ox cart to a hitching post in ancient  Phrygia using a knot that only the future king of all of Asia could untie. The insoluble Gordian Knot held fast for centuries, and even Alexander the Great could not unwind its woven strands of bark.1  I think Midas would have been quite proud of the Texas recreational use statute and its definition of the word "recreation." Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code §§ 75.001(3), .002(e).
The Court makes a valiant effort to determine what qualifies under the statute as "any other activity associated with enjoying nature or the outdoors." Id. § 75.001(3)(L). For the reasons JUSTICE DEVINE explains in the plurality opinion, I agree that the doctrine of ejusdem generis requires us to construe that phrase to include only activities that are "similar in type" to the specific activities the statute lists. Ante at    . But the plurality never defines what that "type" is, nor can it, because it is not possible to fit all of the listed activities into any particular "type." I agree with Justice Johnson that we cannot say, as the plurality seems to suggest, that the "type" of activities listed are only those that:
- use the property "in its natural state," ante at    , because the statute expressly defines "premises" to include "buildings" and "structures"2  and lists several activities that often involve improvements like pools (swimming), cabins (camping), ramps (boating), tables (picnicking), and roads ("pleasure driving" and bicycling);3 
- are not a sport, or a team sport, or even a competitive team sport, ante at    , because the list includes several activities that can be all of these, like fishing, swimming, boating, water sports, bicycling, and disc golf;4 
- do not involve "spectating," ante at    , because the list includes "bird-watching" and other activities in which much of the enjoyment often derives from what the participant observes, like boating, camping, picnicking, hiking, pleasure driving, and cave exploration;5  or
- focus on "that part of the physical world that is removed from human habitation," ante at    , as opposed to a "celebration of organized human activity," ante at    , because the list includes activities that are often enjoyed among groups of people and in areas where  people live and gather, like dog-walking, hockey, and roller-skating.6 
Despite the plurality's admirable efforts, it is simply not possible to describe a "type" of activity that includes things as varied as swimming, disc golf, dog-walking, and hockey, but does not include every activity "associated with enjoying nature or the outdoors"—which would include spectating at an outdoor competitive sporting event.
I am therefore sympathetic to Justice Johnson's conclusion that "[t]he Legislature has not specified that . . . the activities must be for enjoying the outdoors in limited, certain ways[.]" Post at    . But I cannot reach that conclusion because it ignores both the rule of ejusdem generis and the reality that people can enjoy doing almost anything outdoors. Applying the rule of ejusdem generis, I cannot conclude that "recreation" includes eating on the patio at a local restaurant, walking from one store to the next at an outlet mall, or driving to work with the top down or windows open, even though "enjoyment of nature or the outdoors" is "integral to the enjoyment of th[e] activity." Ante at    . Nor could I conclude that a person who "enjoys" mowing the lawn is engaged in "recreation" but a person who considers it to be an undesirable chore is not. Like the plurality, I conclude that the statute limits the meaning of "recreation," but like Justice Johnson, I conclude that the statute provides no clear guidance as to what those limits are.
Justice Guzman, meanwhile, would narrow our focus from the broader purpose of the outing to "the particular activity the plaintiff was engaging in at the time of the injury." Ante at    . Although the plaintiff in this case was at a stadium to watch her daughter play soccer, she was actually injured "while attempting to acquire and sign forms authorizing a high school to release her daughter" after the game had ended. Ante at    . Our decision in City of Bellmead v. Torres provides some support for JUSTICE GUZMAN's conclusion that we must focus on the more narrow activity, 89 S.W.3d 611, 614 (Tex. 2002), but the statute does not support her application of that principle here. In my view, Justice Guzman's application of Bellmead ultimately ignores both the statute's reference to any activity "associated with" enjoying the outdoors and the reality that every "recreational" activity includes more mundane actions that are only "incident to" or "temporally related to," ante at    , but may not themselves qualify as, "enjoying nature or the outdoors." I would conclude, for example, that a camper is still camping when he's walking to the park office to renew his permit to stay another night, a boater is still boating when she's tying the boat up to the dock, and a hunter is still hunting when he's climbing out of the blind to grab another drink from the cooler, even though these are only "temporally related," rather than "closely connected," and may "have no actual connection to an individual's enjoyment of nature or the outdoors." Ante at    .
Each of my colleagues' opinions in this case represents a diligent and reasoned effort to make sense of the recreational use statute, but I ultimately conclude that the statute cannot be sensibly applied, at least without the aid of additional canons of statutory construction. Alexander the Great himself could not figure this one out. Instead, I suspect he would do what legend says he did with Gordian's Knot: he would unsheathe his sword and be done with it.7 
 Fortunately, we have a sword that is custom-made for a statute like this one. As we have repeatedly explained, "if a statute . . . deprives a person of a common law right, the statute will be strictly construed in the sense that it will not be extended beyond its plain meaning or applied to cases not clearly within its purview." Satterfield v. Satterfield, 448 S.W.2d 456, 459 (Tex. 1969).8  "Of course, statutes can modify common law rules, but before we construe one to do so, we must look carefully to be sure that was what the Legislature intended." Energy Serv. Co. of Bowie v. Superior Snubbing Servs., Inc., 236 S.W.3d 190, 194 (Tex. 2007). Because statutes abrogating common law causes of action are disfavored, we will apply them only when there is "a clear repugnance between the common law and statutory causes of action." Cash Am. Int'l Inc. v. Bennett, 35 S.W.3d 12, 16 (Tex. 2000).
As the plurality notes, the recreational use statute "effectively immunizes the landowner or occupant from ordinary negligence claims[.]" Ante at    . Because the statute deprives invitees of their common law right to recover for injuries caused by a landowner's negligence, and instead permits them to recover only upon proof of gross negligence, malicious intent, or bad faith, see Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code § 75.002(d), we must strictly construe it and apply it only to cases that are "clearly within its purview." Satterfield, 448 S.W.2d at 459 (emphasis added). As the Court's varying opinions here demonstrate, this case is not "clearly within [the] purview" of the statute. I would therefore hold that the statute does not apply. I would not hold, however, that the statute can never apply to a case involving an activity that the statute does not list as an example of "recreation." It may be, for example, that jogging, rock-climbing, or repelling "clearly [fits] within [the] purview" of an "activity associated with enjoying nature or the outdoors," as limited by the doctrine of ejusdem generis, but we cannot decide that issue here. What we must decide here is whether spectating at a soccer game or retrieving a child after the game fits that description, and since it does not do so clearly, I would hold that the statute does not apply.
I must address one final point, however, regarding a different "sword" that potentially clashes with the one I apply here. When, as here, the defendant is a governmental unit that enjoys sovereign immunity, see Univ. of Tex. Health Sci. Ctr. at San Antonio v. Bailey, 332 S.W.3d 395, 397 n.5 (Tex. 2001) ("State universities and their component entities are governmental entities within the meaning of the Texas Tort Claims Act."), the recreational use statute limits the scope of the Tort Claims Act's waiver of immunity. See Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code §§ 101.021(2) (providing that governmental units are liable for "personal injury and death so caused by a  condition or use of . . . real property"), 101.025(a) (waiving immunity "to the extent of liability created by this chapter"), 101.058 (providing that the recreational use statute controls "[t]o the extent that [it] limits the liability of a governmental unit under circumstances in which the governmental unit would be liable"). In this sense, the recreational use statute defines the extent of the waiver of immunity, and "[w]e have repeatedly affirmed that any purported statutory waiver of sovereign immunity should be strictly construed in favor of retention of immunity." Prairie View A & M Univ. v. Chatha, 381 S.W.3d 500, 513 (Tex. 2012). It could thus be argued that we should construe and apply the statute broadly, rather than narrowly, to minimize the extent of the statutory waiver and maximize the extent to which the governmental unit retains its immunity. Cf. In re Smith, 333 S.W.3d 582, 587 (Tex. 2011) (explaining that "a statutory waiver of sovereign immunity must be construed narrowly" and "must be clear and unambiguous") (citing Mission Consol. Indep. Sch. Dist. v. Garcia, 253 S.W.3d 653, 655 (Tex. 2008); Wichita Falls State Hosp. v. Taylor, 106 S.W.3d 692, 697 (Tex. 2003); Tex. Gov't Code § 311.034).
I conclude, however, that the canon we announced in Satterfield prevails here for at least three reasons. First, we are construing the recreational use statute in this case, not the Tort Claims Act, and because the recreational use statute applies to all owners, lessees, and occupants of real property, including private parties as well as governmental units, see Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code §§ 75.002(a), .003(c), its primary effect is to abrogate a common law cause of action. Creating an exception to the Tort Claims Act's waiver of sovereign immunity is only a secondary effect resulting from that Act's incorporation of the statute by reference. Second, the recreational use statute expressly states that it does not "create liability" or "waive immunity," and that it controls over any conflict with the Tort Claims Act. See id. § 75.003(d), (f). And third, in my view, the canon of construction that requires courts to narrowly construe a statute that waives immunity does not also require courts to broadly construe separate statutes that provide exceptions to the waiver as a secondary effect.
In summary, consistent with our well-established canons of construction, I would hold that the recreational use statute does not apply here because it deprives the claimant of a common law right and the claimant's activities at issue here are not "clearly within [the statute's] purview." I thus concur in the Court's judgment affirming the court of appeals' judgment, but for the different reasons I have explained.
Jeffrey S. Boyd
Justice
